NSIGHTS about professional communication may come from odd
and unexpected places. McCloud’s
Understanding Comics (hereafter
UC) is a case in point. Despite the
juvenile connotations evoked by
any discussion of comic books, the
theory of visual communication
presented in UC arguably rivals
the best of contemporary semiotics
(that is, the study of how we make
meaning out of gestures, words,
paragraphs, pictures, and so on).
I’d like to relate parts of McCloud’s
comic-book semiotics to our concerns as information designers,
our everyday decisions to use
photographs or line sketches to
convey an idea. As more information is posted on the World Wide
Web and more technical texts are
typeset on computers, most of us
will find it easier to scan original
photographs into our databases
and use these to supplement text.
Line drawings, which used to be
far easier to reproduce than photos
in the old print technologies, now
require (relatively) more time and
artistic skill to render effectively
on computer. Our temptation,
then, will likely be to scan in more
photos and labor over fewer line
sketches. Before giving in to this
temptation, however, we should
consider what UC has to say about
the unique psychological impact
of the line sketch, in other words,
the cartoon.
McCloud lays out a general theory
of “icons” (that is, visual forms
resembling actual objects in some
aspect). All information designers
can make good use of this theory.
In the balance of this article, I will
summarize it and outline just one
of its implications for professional
communicators.
Icon Theory Many have heard of
the distinction semioticians make
between “icons” (visual forms of resemblance, e.g., photos or sketches),
“indices” (pointing signals, e.g.,
smoke pointing to fire or a mercury
level in a thermometer indicating temperature), and “symbols”
(forms with meanings learned only
by habitual use, e.g., a cross on a
church, the letter A, a word, or a
wink). Few know that this distinction was developed by American
semiotician C. S. Peirce (1839–1914)
and that Peirce (whose name is
pronounced like purse) further
divided icons into three basic types
(see, e.g., Peirce’s Collected Papers
[1]):
* “iconic qualisigns” (abstract
forms not necessarily resembling anything but themselves,
e.g., a Jackson Pollock painting);
* “iconic sinsigns” (realistic images resembling actual things,
like a photograph or a realist
painting); and, finally,
* “iconic legisigns” (diagrams
or cartoons—abstracted from
real appearances, but still
perceived as resembling some
real thing).
McCloud recreates and elaborates
on Peirce’s trichotomy of icons,
adopts a simpler terminology, and
cleverly applies this theoretical
schema to the specific problem of
cartoons and comics in relation
to other art forms (pp. 146–149,
Fig. 1 below).
In brief, the history of art actually
began with cartoon-like forms.
Consider cave paintings and Egyptian illustrations (Fig. 2).
From these ancient roots, cartoonish representation evolves
0361–1434/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE in two directions. First, many
Authorized licensed use limited to: Brigham Young University. Downloaded on January 28, 2009 at 10:23 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 41, NO. 1, MARCH 1998 67
cartoon-icons become more symbolic (moving rightward) and form
the basis for written language as
the pictures come to represent
ideas and then sounds rather than
things. The letter A for example
evolved from a stylized sketch of a
bull’s head (aleph), now inverted.
The letter B developed from an
ancient glyph for a house (beth),
and so on. On the other hand,
other cartoon-icons also move in
the opposite direction (leftward),
gradually evolving to more realistic
images, from Egyptian to Renaissance styles.
In modern times, art techniques
reached the pinnacle of realism
(just as photography came along
making the pure-realist artist somewhat superfluous). In order to
progress any further, according to
McCloud, artists had no place to go
but “up” (in the pyramid schema
of Fig. 1), up toward Peirce’s pure
qualisigns, the realm of pure visual
forms, divorced from both physical
reality and external meaning. This
theory explains the trend toward
abstract art typical of the twentieth
century.
Psychological Impact of the Cartoon-Icon Besides justifying the
cartoon comic intellectually in
relation to other art forms, UC employs this same theoretical schema
to explain the line sketch’s unique
psychological impact, conveying
ideas in a way that photo realism
cannot reproduce:
When we abstract an image
through cartooning we’re not
so much eliminating details
as we are focusing on specific
details. By stripping down an
image to its essential “meaning,” an artist can amplify
that meaning in a way that
realistic art can’t. Film critics
will sometimes describe a
live-action film as a “cartoon” to acknowledge the
stripped-down intensity of
a simple story or visual style.
Though the term is often
used disparagingly, it can be
equally well applied to many
time-tested classics [e.g., The
Wizard of Oz]. Simplifying
characters and images toward a purpose can be an
effective tool for storytelling
in any medium. Cartooning
isn’t just a way of drawing, it’s
a way of seeing (pp. 30–31).
Thus cartoons and cartoon-like
sketches provide an ideal medium
for new ideas, new ways of seeing.
Compare an X-men comic book
with a well-illustrated text on nuclear power. A pre-adolescent first
explores ideas of conflict, loyalty,
honor, and self-sacrifice by reading
one. A naval ROTC student first
grasps the workings of a nuclear
sub’s atomic reactor by following
simplified, schematic drawings in
the other. By the theory presented
in UC, these two documents differ
in subject matter, but they do not
differ in principle or in their basic
rules of execution.
Interface with Professional
Communication: Photos Versus
Sketches Most well-written technical writing manuals recognize
that sketches have fewer distracting details than photos and that
this can be an advantage. There
are other reasons, however, to
resist the overuse of photographs
for general instruction purposes,
not covered in standard technical
manuals but explicit in the McCloud/Peirce theory. In McCloud’s
terms, cartoons amplify new ideas
by simplifying them and cartoonlike sketches embody general conFig. 1.
Fig. 2.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Brigham Young University. Downloaded on January 28, 2009 at 10:23 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
68 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 41, NO. 1, MARCH 1998
cepts in a way that no photorealistic image of an actual thing
can. A photograph is the imprint of
one and only one object. A sketch
potentially represents all objects
of a general conceptual type. For
example, I recently encountered on
the World Wide Web a discussion
of dragonflies which made the
following, technical point:
The body plan of the dragonfly is among the most successful of any animal on the
planet, having survived for
hundreds of millions of years
with relatively little change.
Along with grasshoppers,
cockroaches and crickets,
dragonflies have been on the
planet since long before the
dinosaurs. Fossil evidence
tells us that some of the ancestors of this creature were
the size of crows, measuring
two feet from wing tip to wing
tip (http://whyfiles.news.
wisc.edu/coolimages/captions/
dfly2.html).
This passage was linked to a vast
catalog of dragonfly images scanned
in by the Texas Agricultural Experiment station (www.our-town.com/
experiment/ ©1996 by Forrest L
Mitchell. Permission granted for
nonprofit use). I’ve included some
suggestive samples (Fig. 3, bitmaps
of the original color images).
Though the images are impressive,
both in their detail and the sheer
number of them available, they do
not efficiently support the point of
the technical passage given above,
that the general biological design
of dragonflies has been highly
effective for hundreds of millions
of years.
The photographs by themselves
are inadequate for at least two
reasons. First, they do not quickly
give a sense of the general biological design of dragonflies. The
individual insects photographed
vary significantly in leg length,
leg position, tail thickness, wing
shape, and so forth. Second, the
photographs by themselves cannot indicate just what biological
advantages any given dragonfly
has. The line sketch in Fig. 4 is far
better suited to these purposes.
Note too the similarity between the
detail labels typical of diagrammatic sketches (which appeared
in the original) and the balloondialogue convention in comics.
Why does the cartoonish sketch
reinforce the general ideas expressed in words more effectively
than a whole catalogue of photographs? I refer readers again to
Figs. 1 and 2. Cartoons lie closer
than photo-real images to lanFig. 3.
Fig. 4.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Brigham Young University. Downloaded on January 28, 2009 at 10:23 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. 41, NO. 1, MARCH 1998 69
guage and symbolic thought in
the McCloud/Peirce scheme. In
their theory, thoughts and ideas
likewise exist mainly as vaguely
sketched (i.e., cartoon-like) forms.
Since cartoons already exist
as concepts for the reader,
they tend to flow easily
through the conceptual territory between panels But realistic images have a bumpier
ride. Theirs is a primarily visual existence which doesn’t
pass easily into the realm of
ideas (pp. 90–91).
As professional communicators,
our business is to guide readers
along in the realm of ideas. Cartoons and line sketches serve as
essential tools in this business,
tools that ought not be sacrificed
to the now increasing convenience
of scanning and mounting photographic images in our instructional
texts.