This volume contains the proceedings of ICIDS 2017: the 9th International Conference
on Interactive Digital Storytelling. ICIDS 2017 took place at the Madeira Interactive
Technologies Institute (Madeira-ITI), Funchal, Madeira Island, Portugal. This year the
conference included several categories and tracks such as workshops, demos, posters, a
doctoral consortium, and an international art exhibition.
ICIDS is the premier annual venue that gathers researchers, developers, practitioners,
and theorists to present and share the latest innovations, insights, and techniques in the
expanding field of interactive storytelling and the technologies that support it. The field
regroups a highly dynamic and interdisciplinary community, in which narrative studies,
computer science, interactive and immersive technologies, the arts, and creativity
converge to develop new expressive forms in a myriad domains that include artistic
projects, interactive documentaries, cinematic games, serious games, assistive technologies, edutainment, museum science, and advertising, to mention a few.
The ICIDS conference has a long-standing tradition of bringing together academia,
industry, designers, developers, and artists into an interdisciplinary dialogue through a
mix of keynote lectures, panels, long and short article presentations, posters, workshops, lively demo sessions, and the art exhibition. Additionally, since 2010, ICIDS
has been hosting an international art exhibition open to the general public. This year we
inaugurated a new entry, the doctoral consortia, enabling PhD students to receive
feedback on their ongoing research.
The review process was extremely selective and many good papers could not be
accepted for the final program. Altogether, we received 88 submissions in all the
categories. Out of the 65 submitted full and short papers, the Program Committee
selected only 16 long papers and four short paper submissions for presentation and
publication, which corresponds to an acceptance rate of 31%. In addition, we accepted
13 submissions as posters, and five submissions as demonstrations, including some
long and short papers that were offered the opportunity to participate in another category. The ICIDS 2017 program featured contributions from 47 different institutions in
18 different countries worldwide.
The conference program also hosted three invited speakers:
Jay Bushman an award-winning producer and writer of transmedia and
platform-independent entertainment. He was the Transmedia producer and a writer for
“The Lizzie Bennet Diaries” and a groundbreaking video and social media modernization of “Pride and Prejudice” – the show won an Emmy Award for Outstanding
Original Interactive Program and had over 70 million views on YouTube. He was the
cocreator and co-showrunner of the sequel interactive series “Welcome to Sanditon.” As
a writer and producer at Fourth Wall Studios, Jay helped to create the Emmy-winning
series “Dirty Work,” and wrote and created the show “Airship Dracula.” Jay has worked
on interactive campaigns for properties including “Game of Thrones,” “Silicon Valley,”
“Terminator: Genisys,” and “Arrival.” He has also worked as a writer and consultant
for major studios and networks, including Google, HBO, Disney, Paramount, Bad
Robot, and Lucasfilm. An innovator and leader in the transmedia community, he pushes
the boundaries of next-generation entertainment. Jay was one of the original founders
of the professional organization Transmedia Los Angeles (now StoryforwardLA), and
one publication even named him “The Epic Poet of Twitter.” Jay’s keynote was on
“Transmedia Storytelling: No, Really, What Is It?” The joke goes like this: “Put two
transmedia creators in a room together, and pretty quickly you’ll have three definitions
of transmedia.” Everybody who uses the terms means something a little different. With
stories from the trenches of making transmedia projects over the last ten years, this talk
delved into what people mean when they say “transmedia” and why nobody can agree.
The second keynote speaker was Pia Tikka, Adjunct Professor of New Narrative
Media and a professional filmmaker. She is the principal investigator of the NeuroCine
research project and has held a position as a director at Crucible Studio, Department of
Media, Aalto University. In the field of naturalistic neurosciences, she has acted as a
core member of the directory group of the neuroscience research project aivoAALTO
at Aalto University. Her research in neurocinematics focuses on studying the neural
basis of storytelling and creative imagination. She has contributed to neuroeconomics
as a member of the advisory board of the NeuroService research project at the Laurea
University of Applied Sciences, funded by Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for
Innovation. She is a Fellow of Life in the Society for Cognitive Studies of the Moving
Image. Currently, her research team NeuroCine applies neuroimaging methods to study
the neural basis of narrative cognition. Pia’s keynote was on “Systemic Second Order
Authorship for Creating Complex Narratives – A Neurophenomenological Approach.”
In the beginning of the twenty-first century, the theoreticians of interactive narrative
celebrated the birth of the creative audience at the corpse of the author, echoing Roland
Barthes’s words in La mort de l’auteur (1967). But this may have been premature. The
notion of second-order authorship allows for the reformulation of creative authorship in
a manner inspired by the neurophenomenology and systemic enactive mind theory by
Francisco Varela and colleagues (1991). This was exemplified by describing the
authorship of enactive co-presence between a virtual screen character and the viewer.
The third keynote speaker was Suzanne Scott, an assistant professor of Media
Studies in the Department of Radio-Television-Film at the University of Texas at
Austin. Her work has appeared in Critical Studies in Media Communication, Transformative Works and Cultures, Cinema Journal, and New Media & Society, as well as
numerous anthologies, including How to Watch Television and The Participatory
Cultures Handbook. Together with Melissa Click, she has co-edited The Routledge
Companion to Media Fandom (2018), and her current book project considers the
gendered tensions underpinning the media industry’s embrace of fans within convergence culture. Suzanne’s keynote was “Choose Your Own Adventure: Fandom and the
Future of Interactive Storytelling.” Fan culture has, from its inception, treated media
objects as inherently interactive, playing in the textual gaps and margins and, in some
cases, radically reimagining a storyworld’s fictive limits. Tracing both the history of
transformative fan texts (e.g., fanfiction, fan vids) from analog to digital participatory
VI Preface
cultures, as well as the politics of these industrially unauthorized interactions, this
keynote suggested that the barriers to embracing a more expansive conception of
“interactive digital storytelling” lie in lingering anxieties surrounding authorial and
commercial control. Just as scholarly work on interactive storytelling must acknowledge programmatic or structural limitations on user agency, even as we celebrate the
participatory and collaborative capacity of the form, this talk explored how media
industries, creators, and technologies alternately curtail and foster fan culture’s interactive impulses.
In addition to paper and poster presentations, ICIDS 2017 featured a preconference
workshop day with five workshops:
WS1: History of Expressive Systems, organized by Mark J. Nelson and James Ryan
WS2: Transmedia Journalism and Interactive Documentary in Dialogue,
by Renira Rampazzo Gambarato and Alessandro Nanì
WS3: Authoring for Interactive Storytelling, organized by Charlie Hargood,
Alex Mitchell, David Millard, and Uli Spierling
WS4: Bringing Together Interactive Digital Storytelling with Tangible Interaction:
Challenges and Opportunities, organized by Alejandro Catala, Mariët Theune,
Cristina Sylla, and Pedro Ribeiro
WS5: Film-Live: An Innovative Immersive and Interactive Cinema Experience,
organized by Mattia Costa, Chiara Ligi and Francesca Piredda
In conjunction with the academic conference, the Art Exhibition of the 9th International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling was held at the conference
venue, Vidamar Resorts, during November 14–15, 2017. The 2017 ICIDS Art Exhibition featured a variety of art pieces of interactive storytelling in various media
including Web-documentaries, VR film, narrative games, augmented reality mobile
applications, and Transmedia projects produced by over 30 artists of national and
international origin. The exhibition’s theme of “Time & Tempo” encouraged artists to
explore the intrinsic qualities of interactive narrative as a time-based medium, user
rhythms, and storytelling themes that incorporate history, time-travel, or other playful
engagements.
Each submission was reviewed independently by three members of the selection
jury, after which each submission received a meta-review analysis from the curators.
Submissions were scored on a graded scale, which was averaged across all reviewers
for the meta-review and final decision. The exhibition artwork is featured in the ICIDS
2017 ISBN numbered catalogue published by ETC Press.
We would like to express our gratitude and sincere appreciation to all the authors
included in this volume for their effort in preparing their submissions and for their
participation in the conference. Equally we want to heartily thank all the members
of the Organizing Committee and the Program Committee. Thanks as well to our art
exhibition jurors for their accuracy and diligence in the review process, our invited
speakers for their insightful and inspirational talks, and the workshop organizers for the
Preface VII
dynamism and creativity that they brought to the conference. A special thank goes to
the ICIDS Steering Committee for granting us the opportunity to host ICIDS 2017 at
Madeira-ITI in Funchal, Portugal. Thanks to you all!