In addition to cocaine, the conflict, football, and sex, Colombia is 
also renowned as one of the world’s most extraordinary natural environments. 
From animals to flowers, insects to fruits, gorges to mountains, and rivers to 
oceans, a cornucopia spreads across its continental and tropical climates. We saw 
the appeal this has to tourism marketers in chapter 2.
But the nation’s natural environment has been subjected to ruinous exploitation and repeated human-rights violations. The conquistadores relished telling 
heroic tales detailing their destruction of indigenous life. That devastation was 
also ecological—their sixteenth-century arrival brought new diseases and land 
use, disrupting an environment that had long sustained human and other life 
(Colmenares 1996).
Since that time, Colombia has been in thrall to the extractive industries, industrial farming, and the use of biopower to control populations and jeopardize the 
environment, all in the name of government, development, tourism—and 
sometimes even sustainability (Asher and Ojeda 2009; Anguelovski and Alier 
2014; Rochlin 2015). Most recent armed violence has occurred in “biodiversity 
hotspots” rather than cities, in keeping with the tendency for post-conflict periods across the history of capitalism to see rapid and brutal economic development. With corporations itching to exploit minerals and farmland in jungle areas 
formerly occupied by the FARC, deforestation shot up by almost half in 2016, 
when the peace accord was signed (Salazar et al. 2018). Environmental defenders 
are assassinated in the interests of legal and illegal miners at rates beyond, for 
example, the deaths of British and Australian soldiers serving in wars over the 
same period (Butt et al. 2019). Global Witness estimates that Colombia has the 
second-highest number of such murders, behind the Philippines (2019: 8).
The country’s extraordinary ecosystem is also under massive population pressure, with a quadrupling of residents to almost fifty million over the last three 
Copyright 2020. Rutgers University Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 2318048 ; Toby Miller.; The Persistence of Violence : Colombian Popular Culture
Account: undeloan.main.eds
126 The Per sistence of Violence
decades (Salazar et  al. 2018). The rate is faster than the regional average, with 
precious mangrove swamps progressively lost (Bolívar-Anillo et al. 2019). Most 
of Colombia’s people live in the elevated Andes. With a changing climate, water 
shortages and unstable land plague their lives. On the coasts, higher sea levels 
and increased flooding are becoming a norm (Escobar 1998; Oslender 2004; 
Vergara et al. 2016).1
In reaction to developmental exploitation of the kind that produced this 
coming catastrophe, the nation has a significant and growing informal recycling 
sector and environmental movement. The particular environmental challenges 
faced by campesino, indigenous, and Afro-Colombians have seen social movements organize around collective versus individual and corporate rights over 
everything from biotechnology to river banks (Nemogá 2014; Velasco 2016). 
Protesting traditional landowners experienced firsthand the devastation thirty 
years earlier when a dam was built to redirect the Río. Now they face many more 
such interventions, as well as fracking. Two hundred thousand residents have 
been displaced by dams, and forced departures are accompanied by military and 
private-security occupation of public areas once used for sustainable fishing and 
relaxation (Caycedo and Aguas 2015). When the venerable yet still quaintly adolescent research and agitprop multinational Greenpeace set up shop there in 
2009, rather than simply channelling global corporate campaigns, it sensitively 
focused on issues of particular pertinence to the nation, notably the páramos
(moors) of the Sierra Nevadas and Andes, which produce three quarters of the 
water for Colombia’s major cities, and are under dire threat from climate change 
(Ruiz et al. 2012).2
Our focus here, the Río Magdalena (Magdalena River), is 1,500 kilometers 
long. It passes through eleven of Colombia’s thirty-two departments to its mouth 
in the Caribbean Sea, draining most of the Colombian Andes along the way. The 
Río “covers 22% of the surface of the national territory, is home to 80% of the 
population and produces 85% of GDP” (Escobar Ramírez and Barg 1990). Some 
call it “the homeland river” (Castro 2013). The entire area has long been subject 
to intense anthropocentric change: in the thirty years from 1970, more than 
230,000 hectares of forest were destroyed annually in a restless search for precious metals, arable land, and grazing for cattle. By 2000, 80 percent of the tropical Andes’s natural vegetation had been lost, most of it in the Magdalena’s basin 
(Restrepo et al. 2015).
The Río already has the largest sediment yield of all South American rivers, 
and the tenth-highest worldwide. That sedimentation has negatively influenced 
fishing and the transport of goods for import and export (Peña et  al. 2015; 
Restrepo et al. 2018). In addition, deforestation through agriculture and urbanization has produced dramatic erosion and pollution, endangering water supplies not only along the coast but in the central region as well. Climate change 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 127
and volcanism have also transmogrified the river. Its wildlife has been particularly affected by human economic exploitation, with a unique turtle threatened, 
fishes suffering high concentrations of mercury due to gold mining, and coral 
reefs and sea-grass beds imperiled. Even the OECD notes that environmental 
imperatives have been overrun by state-capitalist ones, because governmental 
institutions supposedly dedicated to preservation and sustainability have grown 
weak by contrast with more developmentalist agencies (Restrepo et  al. 2006; 
Vargas 2009; López-Castaño and Cano-Echeverri 2011; Hammond et  al. 2013; 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2014; Restrepo 
2015). Yet the same OECD laments the fact that delays in “navigation projects” 
devised for the Río held back national economic growth in 2018 (Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 2018: 97)!
The Corporación Autónoma Regional del Río Grande de la Magdalena 
(Autonomous Regional Corporation of the Great River Magdalena) is responsible for managing the river in terms of energy, land use, port facilities, transportation, and sustainability. Its slogan reads: “The energy of a river that drives a 
country.”3 But a Chinese state multinational, Hydrochina, produced a key vision 
of the Magdalena’s future. Embraced by the Colombian government, this model 
satisfies all the current clichés of privatization and power generation while in fact 
being promulgated by Chinese Communist Party cadres dressed as businesspeople, alongside Spanish and Italian firms (“El futuro” 2014; Ramírez and Santiago 
2015). The record of PRC investment in Colombia’s extractive sector is not 
promising when it comes to environmental responsibility (Wu 2019).
The physical terrain of the region has long been a stimulus to aesthetic and 
political celebration and lamentation as well as exploitation. Landscape narratives of conquest and control were important to the Spaniards and to the consolidation of Colombia as an independent nation during the nineteenth century 
(Acosta Peñaloza 2014). The Magdalena in particular has animated contestation, 
comfort, fear, beauty, horror, and cultural expression. Some conquistadores 
believed they had found the original Garden of Eden, watered by the Magdalena 
(Galeano 1997: 14). The river’s eighteenth- and nineteenth-century indigenous 
and African rowers shouted, prayed, and stomped in order to mark out their 
labor and connect with one another, annoying and obsessing their white chroniclers in equal measure (Ochoa Gautier 2014: 35–42).4
We demonstrate in this chapter that a vibrant green passion is evident in 
Colombian popular culture, specifically in letters to the editor covering environmental matters, notably the river. Our analysis shows that it has provoked a wide 
array of emotions that flow through—and sometimes flood—daily life. As per 
the previous chapter, we use political economy and content analysis. Prior to 
doing so, it is necessary to engage the nature of our current ecological crisis and 
its links to anti- and pro-environmental thought.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
128 The Per sistence of Violence
What on Earth Is Green?
The world’s climate is changing in ways that imperil us, our fellow animals, other 
forms of life, and the Earth itself. Past and present industrial processes have 
exposed the planet to potentially irrevocable harm as we enter what the scientific 
community announced in 2016 as the Anthropocene—an epoch characterized 
by major geological and ecological changes brought about by human activity 
(Subcommission on Quaternary Stratigraphy 2016).
Climate science leaves little doubt that humans have made the Earth an 
inhospitable place for life to flourish. The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warns that we have about twelve years to make radical changes to 
our carbon-emitting ways, or disaster awaits (Watts 2018). The U.S. National Climate Assessment, a project of thirteen federal departments and agencies, reports 
that the country faces imminent risks from rising sea levels, wildfires, drought, 
floods, atmospheric warming, and a weakening of its ecosystems’ ability to absorb 
carbon emissions and other greenhouse gases (U.S. Global Change Research 
Program 2018). Ninety-seven percent of scientists say humans are responsible 
for global warming and we must radically change our behavior to save the planet’s biosphere, ecosystems, and inhabitants (Marlon et al. 2018). The message has 
gotten through in Colombia. Well over three-quarters of the population regard 
climate change as a critical challenge (Evans and Zechmeister 2018). What is the 
history to this growing awareness?
In the late 1960s and early ’70s, the word pollution was in vogue to explain 
environmental hazards. Both a ubiquitous and a local sign, it seemed to be everywhere, yet isolable. The problems it described occurred when particular waterways, neighborhoods, or fields suffered negative externalities from mining, 
farming, and manufacturing. The issue was how to restore these places to their 
prior state: pristine, unspoiled, enduring. Pollution was about corporate malfeasance, governmental neglect, public ignorance, and how to remedy their malign 
impact. It could be cleaned up if governments compelled companies to do so—
and would soon be over, once those involved understood the problem.
But when greenhouse gases, environmental racism, global warming, occupational health, and environmental imperialism appeared on the agenda, pollution 
reached beyond national boundaries and became ontological, threatening the very 
Earth that gives and sustains life, and doing so in demographically unequal ways.
A word was found to describe the values and forms of life that encompassed a 
planetary consciousness to counter this disaster, as per the utopias of world government that had animated transnational imaginations for decades: green
emerged to displace the more negative and limited pollution, signifying both new 
possibilities and a greater and more global sense of urgency. Its purview 
expanded from waterways and work places to populations and the planet.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 129
Today, green can refer to local, devolved, non-corporate empowerment, or 
international consciousness and institutional action. The term is invoked by both 
conservatives, who emphasize maintaining the world for future generations, and 
radicals, who stress anti-capitalist, postcolonial, feminist perspectives. Green may 
highlight the disadvantages of technology as a primary cause of environmental 
difficulties or hail such innovations as future saviors, via devices and processes 
yet to be invented that will alleviate global warming. It can favor state and international regulation, or be skeptical of public policy. It may encourage individual 
consumer responsibility, or question localism by contrast with collective action. 
It can reflect left–right axes of politics, or argue that they should be transcended, 
because neither statism nor individualism can fix the dangers we confront.
This massive, conflictual expansion in meaning has generated a wide array of 
instrumental uses. So green environments are promoted as exercise incentives 
(Gladwell et al. 2013), encouragements for consumers to use quick-response codes 
(Atkinson 2013), ways of studying whether plants communicate through music 
(Gagliano 2013), attempts to push criminology toward interrogating planetary 
harm (Lynch et al. 2013), gimmicks for recruiting desirable employees (Renwick 
et al. 2013), and techniques for increasing labor productivity (Woo et al. 2014).
In short, green has come to signify the good life—not merely our own, but 
that of our fellow animals and collective descendants yet to be born. It stands for 
a new solidarity that takes off from climate science to seek a better, more secure 
future, transcending the usual homilies and shibboleths of individual agency or 
investor returns.
There is a spirited and growing green youth movement around the world protesting political inaction over the eco-crisis, standing up to billionaires and politicians, insisting that they act on the science (Wearden and Carrington 2019). A 
generation born in an era of peak disaster from global warming will not tolerate 
the craven politics of world leaders beholden to barons of industry and finance, 
fossil-fuel giants, and technology moguls. Tens of thousands of western European school pupils went on strike in the winter of 2019 with the slogans #FridaysForFuture and “There’s no Planet B” (“Children’s Climate” 2019), attracting 
major Latin American coverage.5 Hence also women deciding to #BirthStrike 
because they feel unable to guarantee climate security to future generations 
(Doherty 2019), and the efforts of Extinction Rebellion.6 Their task is huge—UN
secretary-general Antonio Guterres warns that the political will to combat climate 
change is “fading” (quoted in “Political Will” 2019). Public support for action to 
stem our eco-crisis remains a work in progress, building slowly as people come 
to grasp the urgency of a planetary problem. But there are signs of a new citizenry ready to act on their environmental commitments. Nature and the British 
Medical Journal alike drew inspiration from #FridaysForFuture (Fisher 2019; 
Stott et al. 2019).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
130 The Per sistence of Violence
Like scientists in general, climate scholars emphasize the need for patience in 
undertaking and understanding their work, which relies on the steady accumulation of data. Climate is history: the average of weather (Chakrabarty 2014). These 
researchers face a special difficulty: the willful distortion of climate science by 
the bourgeois Anglo media. Corporate and state polluters and their acolytes in 
strategic communications and pseudo-academia feast on mundane but sensible 
scholarly disagreements among climate experts, which are mendaciously misconstrued as evidence that climate change is an invention (Lewandowsky et al. 
2015; Maxwell and Miller 2016). Public discourse is dominated by such coinoperated ideologues, while climate-change scientists struggle to be heard.7
How did we arrive at this state of affairs? Latour proposes that “it is as though 
a significant segment of the ruling classes . . . had concluded that the earth no 
longer had room for them and for everyone else” (2018: 15–16). But that way of 
thinking has a longer history than his otherwise correct analysis might suggest.
A complex heritage underpins worldviews that focus on the interests of 
human beings (anthropocentrism) versus the planet as a whole (eco-centrism). 
Hobbes argued that as part of “the war of all against all,” it is right for people to 
domesticate or destroy nature (1998: 105–106), their brute state legitimized via 
the physiocratic transformation or destruction of subjects and objects. For 
Bacon, “commerce between the mind of man and the nature of things . . . is more 
precious than anything on earth” (1620). Descartes maintained that “reason or 
good sense . . . exists whole and complete in each of us, . . . the only thing that 
makes us men and distinguishes us from the lower animals” (2007: 1). Kant 
deemed humans uniquely important: “through rank and dignity [they were] an 
entirely dif­ferent being from things, such as irrational animals, with which one 
can do as one likes” (2006: 15). No vegan or animal-rights guy he.
A century later, Hegel celebrated human mastery of nature; it is because one 
can put one’s “will into everything” that a place or object “becomes mine.” People 
were purportedly unique in their desire and capacity to conserve objects and 
represent them via semiosis, and such willpower was independent of simple survival. It set humanity apart from other living things. As per Kant, the capacity to 
transcend “spontaneity and natural constitution” supposedly distinguished us 
from other animals. Semiotic abilities legitimized the destructive use of power; 
Hegel termed this “the right of absolute proprietorship.” The corollary of this 
right was that “unused land cannot be guaranteed.” The necessary relationship 
between people and nature asserted itself at the core of human consciousness as a 
struggle to achieve freedom from risk and want (Hegel 1954: 242–243, 248–250).
These thinkers reasoned that because people are unique in their desire and 
capacity to conserve objects and represent them via semiosis, a strange dialectical process affords humanity a special right of destruction. Willpower is independent of simple survival and sets humanity apart from other living things. 
When semiotic abilities were mobilized by civilizations intent on transforma-
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 131
tion rather than stasis, they licensed colonial and imperial adventurism over 
indigenous rights: “sacred respect for . . . unused land cannot be guaranteed,” 
argued Hegel. Nature’s “tedious chronicle,” where there is “nothing new under 
the sun,” is rightly and righteously disrespected and disobeyed by colonialism’s 
drive toward progress (Hegel 1988: 50, 154, 61).
These originary contradictions of development included a heartfelt desire for 
transformation of enslaved nations, whether for religious or liberal reasons. The 
cultural policies of Spain’s conquista de América, Portugal’s missão civilizadora, 
and France’s mission civilisatrice mentioned in the introduction informed the 
dogma of terra nullius (empty space), which denied land title to native people, 
imagining their ideological and pragmatic lives to be harmonized with nature 
and hence incapable of transforming and marking it.8 When efforts directed at 
rural development failed, this was because “peoples of low social efficiency” predominated (Kidd 2009: 311). The equivalent to terra nullius in Colombia was the 
vast swath of land known in the colonial period as baldíos (useless or empty territories), areas largely occupied by indigenous people living beyond the hacienda system. This terrain was understood as essentially eminent domain, 
property of the state awaiting disposal. By the 1930s, the government recognized 
the right of rural workers to unionize, but declared that any land not used would 
be resumed (Celis González 2018: 33, 35–36). Hegelian discourse suits just such 
applied philosophizing: economic growth as a creed. Henry Ford argued that 
“unused forces of nature [must be] put into action . . . to make them mankind’s 
slaves” (1929: 71), while Vannevar Bush celebrated the drive to release humanity 
“from the bondage of bare existence” (1945).
That ideology of growth has served to undo nature, with unimagined consequences. Its mythology of innovation and adoption mixes the sublime—the 
awesome, the ineffable, the uncontrollable, the powerful—with the beautiful—
the approachable, the attractive, the pliant, the soothing. In philosophical aesthetics, the sublime and the beautiful are generally regarded as opposites. But they 
have blended in the “technological sublime,” a totemic, quasi-sacred quality that 
industrial societies cathectically ascribe to modern machinery, engineering, 
design, and marketing, as simultaneously powerful and pretty (Nye 1994, 2006). 
The emergence of the technological sublime has been attributed to Japanese, 
western European, and U.S. industrial achievements of the post–Second World 
War period, when the successful provision of food, power, communications, and 
water allied with the emergence of new consumer products to supplant nature’s 
capacity to inspire fear and astonishment.
Alternatives
Within the traditions that birthed anthropocentrism, wiser views have always 
flourished, given the reality that “we have only ever managed to philosophize 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
132 The Per sistence of Violence
with the help of things: the turning stars, apples which fall, turtles and hares, rivers and gods” (Muecke 2008: 95). Intergenerational care has long been a centerpiece of African American environmental thought (Smith 2007), and indigenous 
cosmologies deny a bifurcation between humanity and the Earth (Escobar 2012).
Within Western philosophy, Plato referred to the power of natural disasters to 
undo social and technological advances, which he called “crafty devices.” When 
these “tools were destroyed,” new inventions and a pacific society, based on 
restraint rather than excess, could emerge (1972: 119–122). Even Bacon recognized that we must “wait upon nature instead of vainly affecting to overrule her” 
(1620). Burke acknowledged each generation as “temporary possessors and liferenters” of the natural and social world. People must maintain “chain and continuity” rather than act ephemerally as if they were “flies of a summer,” thus 
ensuring “a partnership not only between those who are living, but between 
those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born.” This 
would sustain “the great primeval contract of eternal society” (1986: 192–195).
Hume maintained that animals, like people, “learn many things from experience,” developing “knowledge of the nature of fire, water, earth, stones, heights, 
depths, etc.” in addition to processing instructions as part of their domestication 
(1955: 112–113). Rather than being merely sensate, some of our fellow creatures 
apply logic through inference—what he called “the reason of animals” (1739). 
Bentham enquired of our duty of care to them: “the question is not, Can they 
reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?” (1970). Alexander von Humboldt was horrified by Hegel’s anthropocentric method as much as his theory: 
“To a man like me,—spellbound, insect-fashion, to earth and the endless variety 
of natural phenomena which it contains,—a dry theoretical assertion of utterly 
false facts and views about America and the Indian world is enslaving and 
oppressive” (2009: 34).
Even Kant acknowledged our fellow animals’ capacity for reflection (2000: 15). 
He wrote vivid descriptions of the natural world as simultaneously beautiful and 
sublime, aesthetic and awesome—a terrifying place where “the shadows of the 
boundless void into the abyss before me.” This horrifying specter risked an apocalyptic vision that one day we may realize there is nothing left, nothing else, 
nothing beyond (2011: 17)—akin to William James noting that “nature is but a 
name for excess” (1909: 63). Such anxieties obliged Kant to recognize that the 
objects of natural science had a history; and hence, perhaps, a limited future. But 
he remained anthropocentric, convinced that “to know the human being . . .
deserves to be called knowledge of the world, even though he constitutes only one 
part of the creatures on earth” (2006: 3).
Horkheimer dolefully regarded “man” [sic] as a “rapacious race, more brutal 
than any previous beasts of prey; he preserves himself at the expense of the rest 
of nature, since he is so poorly outfitted by nature in many respects” and must 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 133
survive through violence (1996: 32).9 Schopenhauer saw himself “as a mere temporal product of nature that has come into being and is destined for total destruction” (2015: 16); Spinoza understood that “men, like all other things, are only a 
part of nature” (de Spinoza 2016: 14); and Charles Babbage, the mythic founder 
of programmable computation, noted in 1832 the partial and ultimately limited 
ability of humanity to bend and control natural forces without unforeseen 
consequences:
The operations of man . . . are diminutive, but energetic during the short period 
of their existence: whilst those of nature, acting over vast spaces, and unlimited 
by time, are ever pursuing their silent and resistless career.
It took Engels to recognize the fundamental truth of environmentalism: that 
“nature does not just exist, but comes into being and passes away” (1946: 9). He 
noted anthropocentrism’s peculiar faith in “the absolute immutability of nature. In 
whatever way nature itself might have come into being, once present it remained 
as it was as long as it continued to exist . . . everything would remain as it had 
been since the beginning” (1946: 6). In that context, Luxemburg criticized 
“bankrupt politicians” who “seek refuge and repose in nature” without observing that its very existence was compromised and shortened by industrial capital 
(1970: 335). And Marcuse realized that
the demands of ever more intense exploitation come into conflict with nature 
itself, since nature is the source and locus of the life-instincts which struggle 
against the instincts of aggression and destruction. And the demands of exploitation progressively reduce and exhaust resources: the more capitalist productivity 
increases, the more destructive it becomes. This is one sign of the internal contradictions of capitalism. . . .
[Nature] is a dimension beyond labor, a symbol of beauty, of tranquility, of a nonrepressive order. Thanks to these values, nature was the very negation of the market society. (1972: 11)
In Engels’s words, the appearance of human beings marked the evolutionary 
point where “nature attains consciousness of itself ” (1946: 17). Despite this debt 
to Hegel, he realized that people therefore had the ability and responsibility to 
observe and speak for those without voices, and protect those without power. 
For while our fellow animals can transform their living conditions, they do so 
without an evident, deliberate, and elaborated codification of what that achieves 
or means. The distinction does not make us and our interests superordinate; 
with special abilities come special responsibilities.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
134 The Per sistence of Violence
William Morris’s call for the art world to recognize its links to everyday life 
insisted on the need to re-create beautiful surroundings as a precondition for 
beautiful creations following the devastation of the Industrial Revolution: “Of 
all the things that is likely to give us back popular art in England, the cleaning of 
England is the first and most necessary. Those who are to make beautiful things 
must live in a beautiful place.” Put another way, the semiosis so prized by Hegel 
is only sustainable in a state of nature, so humans must “abstain from willfully 
destroying that beauty” (Morris 1884).
Heidegger argued that technology makes “the unreasonable demand” that 
nature “supply energy which can be extracted and stored,” bending seasonal 
rhythms to the demands of work, growth, and competition (1977: 288, 296, 299). 
For Baudrillard, “the human race is beginning to produce itself as waste-product, 
to carry out this work of waste disposal on itself ” (1994: 78). Latour says that 
“while we emancipated ourselves, each day we also more tightly entangled ourselves in the fabric of nature” (2015: 221). Here again, the impact of technology is 
not merely a human problem, but one shared by all inhabitants of Earth. There is 
a duty of care to the weak on the part of the strong as denizens of shared space—
and a recognition that the ultimate technological fix to counter ecologically 
destructive conduct may not be found.
The lesson is clear. Nature’s duality—that it is simultaneously self-generating 
and sustaining, yet its survival is contingent on human rhetoric and despoliation—
makes it vulnerable. But nature will strike back, sooner or later, in mutually 
assured destruction. Without it, there can be no humanity, as changes in the 
material world caused by people and their tools compromise the survival of the 
planet’s most skillful and willful, productive and destructive, inhabitant (Marx 
2008). Latour explains:
From the time the term “politics” was invented, every type of politics has been 
defined by its relation to nature, whose every feature, property, and function 
depends on the polemical will to limit, reform, establish, short-circuit, or enlighten 
public life. (2004: 1)
Beneath this lofty philosophy, more mundane social-science accounts of the 
environment proliferate. They are dominated by three discursive formations:
• Economics, to assess exchange value
• Psychology, to evaluate individuals
• Sociology and anthropology, to comprehend societies
Environmental economics focuses on climate change as a consequence of the 
supposed absence of pure market forces (Ostrom 2000). Dutifully obeying the 
données (set beliefs) of reactionary fans of an imaginary capitalism, it argues that 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 135
once prices are placed on such negative externalities as pollution, everything can 
be put to rights through the operation of supply and demand (Hardin 1968).
Ecological economists dissent from their monotheistic parent discipline, calling for restraints on growth via governments limiting unbridled impacts on our 
future and the use of varied forms of thought to comprehend and counter climate change. They evaluate the technologies and materials that can support 
human populations and nature, with the goal of avoiding undue stress on all participants. Their “Ecological Footprint” instrument measures environmental 
value rather than monetary exchange, and prioritizes sustainable life over productivity and profit. It calculates global environmental capacity by hectare and 
judges numerical sustainability (Martínez-Alier 2012).
Feminist economists have also called for a reconsideration of elements not 
generally assumed relevant by neoclassicists, because they transcend market 
pricing. These critics seek to bring the body as a sensate entity into analyses of 
environmental impact (Perkins and Kuiper 2005; Nelson 2009). As part of an 
ongoing dispute with binaristic divisions between nature and culture, feminist 
theory more generally has interrogated the notion of progress as productivist 
and accumulationist (Soper 1995; Conley 1997). Some strands posit an essential 
distinction between men and women that finds the former responsible for the 
theory and practice of environmental destruction, and the latter conversely 
blessed and cursed with unshakeable connections to the Earth, due to their 
enhanced experience of reproduction and caregiving (Sandilands 1999; Thompson 2006). Others look at the gendered politics of labor and differences between 
the Global North and South, with religion, class, and indigeneity important 
factors (Goldman and Schurman 2000: 571–574).
For their part, environmental anthropology and sociology struggle against 
both extrapolations from the magical mechanics of supply and demand and the 
latest incarnations of the “Human Exceptionalism Paradigm” that emerged from 
Kant and Hegel. As we have seen, that regrettably influential declaration allocates to us and us alone the right and the capacity to exercise sovereignty over 
the Earth (Catton and Dunlap 1978).
It is under challenge. For while early modernity was dedicated to establishing 
national power and producing and distributing goods and revenue in a struggle 
for the most effective and efficient forms of industrialization, with devil take the 
hindmost and no thought for the environment, today’s risk society involves enumerating, euphemizing, and managing those dangers (Beck 1999). It is now clear 
that developed modernity produces new, trans-territorial risks, beyond the 
scope of traditional governmental guarantees of collective security and affluence 
(Goldman and Schurman 2000). Populations face crises brought on by deliberate policies, for example, nuclear energy, genocidal weaponry, biotechnology, 
and industrial pollution—“professional miscalculations and scientific discoveries hurtling out of control” (Kitzinger and Reilly 1997: 320). Despite their 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
136 The Per sistence of Violence
chauvinism, feelings of national patrimony can persuade people to transcend 
consuming desires and think about heritage and legacy, as citizens who think backward and forward rather than just contemporaneously (de-Shalit 2006: 76).
Environmental Marxism ties nature to capital and labor. It favors the regulation of business and work to comply with ecological principles (Benton 1996; 
O’Connor 1998), while deep ecology presents the most venerable and severe 
challenge to social-science and public-policy anthropomorphism. Arne Naess 
summed up his basic eco-centric precepts like this:
1. The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human life on Earth have 
value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent worth). These values 
are independent of the usefulness of the non-human world for human 
purposes.
2. Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of these values and are also values in themselves.
3. Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to satisfy 
vital needs.
4. The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a substantially 
smaller human population. The flourishing of non-human life requires a 
smaller human population.
5. Present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and the 
situation is rapidly worsening.
6. Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic economic, 
technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs will be 
deeply dif­ferent from the present.
7. The ideological change will be mainly that of appreciating life quality (dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an increasingly 
higher standard of living. There will be a profound awareness of the difference 
between bigness and greatness.
8. Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation directly or 
indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes. (1995: 68)
There are problems with this perspective, notably the insistence on restricted 
population growth and zero pleasurable consumption, and its assumption of a 
capacity to sidestep propaganda. Deep ecology requires a mixture of millenarianism, hope, and activism that sometimes veers closer to religious mind control 
than democratic science.
Sen proposes a compromise between anthropocentrism and eco-centrism:
The impact of the environment on human lives must be among the principal considerations in assessing the value of the environment. To take an extreme example, in understanding why the eradication of smallpox is not viewed as an 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 137
impoverishment of nature (we do not tend to lament: “the environment is poorer 
since the smallpox virus has disappeared”). (2009: 248)
As noted earlier, human beings are the most powerful and destructive creatures 
on Earth, and we have a special responsibility to speak for and defend others; to 
support a world given to us that may hold unthought-of benefits to our descendants, if only it is maintained for them (Sen 2009: 251–252).
Most of these philosophers and social scientists remain shy of phrasing the 
real question, the one that haunts both neoclassical chorines and dutiful Marxists, who are equally dedicated to the triumphant march of development—
namely, the requirement to limit consumption, restrict the generation of need 
and the exploitation of scarcity, and hence bind the twin arms of capitalism in a 
controlling embrace. How can this be achieved, given the growth evangelism of 
state, capital, and the bourgeois media?
Social psychology and neuropsychology indicate that people who do not 
regard themselves as directly affected by climate change may adopt environmental values when stimulated to think beyond their own lives and consider, albeit 
anthropocentrically as per Burke, the lives of those yet to be born (Zavall et al. 
2015). Longitudinal studies suggest that people familiar with climate-change evidence are confirmed in their beliefs by personal experience, while those with less 
knowledge can be stirred to commitment when directly confronted by environmental events (Myers et al. 2013). Such strategies align with research on environmental frames, ideology, and political partisanship (Lakoff 2010).
Media coverage and public-service announcements usually frame environmental risk via moral arguments about social harm and care, especially following 
disasters of epic proportions (Pantti et al. 2012). Such stories resonate with progressive readers. When pro-environmental approaches evoke purity and disgust, 
they resonate with conservatives (Feinberg and Willer 2013). Progressives can be 
appealed to by social- and self-awareness, conservatives through risks and 
rewards (Schreiber et al. 2013). Conservatives react to repellent imagery of environmental disaster in pro-environmental ways when it elicits horror or poses 
threats to bodily purity, such as contaminated water from the Magdalena.
Emotion discourse has also proven effective in educational settings for stimulating environmental awareness (Reis and Roth 2009). The Canadian Centre for 
Policy Alternatives notes that “people are more likely to engage with stories 
about people and ecosystems (and polluters) that are close to where they are” 
(Cross et al. 2015: 40). So green persuasion should include a liberal emphasis on 
the aesthetic and moral values derived from nature, in combination with frightening photos of habitat destruction and oil-slimed waterways. As we shall see, a 
spectrum of the Colombian population is deeply committed to “their” river—a 
suitable and necessary case for environmental commitment and activism—and 
express their concern as vividly as one can imagine.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
138 The Per sistence of Violence
The Meaning of the Magdalena
Orlando Fals Borda’s analysis of the people who inhabit the Río’s banks found 
“communities immersed in a world that seemed to have stopped in isolation, but 
which suffered from . . . the tensions of the great modern society to which they 
belonged” (1986: 16a). Their amphibious culture presented a “complex of behaviors, beliefs, and practices related to the management of the natural environment,” 
replete with “ideological elements . . . prejudices, superstitions, and legends” 
(1986: 21b). One of the most famous legends, which has also appeared in music, 
concerns the alligator man. It tells the story of a fisherman from Plato Magdalena 
who becomes an alligator with the help of a magic formula so he can spy on 
women bathing in the river without being discovered. One day, the white liquid 
that enables him to return to his natural shape disappears in the water. A  few 
drops fall on his face and he is permanently transformed into half man, half alligator—a hybrid beast that women fear and men hunt (1986: 26b).
The sense of a spirit incarnate in the Magdalena has influenced artists, writers, 
filmmakers, curators, and composers alike,10 often identified with the very nation 
itself, as in Marco Aurelio Álvarez and Óscar García’s song “Puente Pumarejo.”11
J.A.M. Gómez counts sixteen Colombian and four foreign feature films, three 
videos, fifty-six short movies, and four television series about the river (n.d.).12
For example, the video artist Carolina Caycedo works with anti-extraction 
groups to record the destruction wrought by damming (Gómez-Barris 2017).
It can be no surprise that the country’s astonishing variety of wildlife, scenery, 
and tragedy went on to stimulate the celebrated and passionate literary genre, 
realismo mágico. Its most noted rhapsodist was of course García Márquez. 
Because most Colombians have lived in the basin formed by the river, Gabo 
could not think of a more fitting background to the magical lives of his characters 
than the natural scenery and human welfare it provided (Salazar et al. 2018). He 
based his description of the region’s exuberant fauna and flora on observation; 
knowledge of untold numbers of adventurers, migrants, traders, and romantics; 
and an interpretation of nineteenth-century artworks that represented zones 
which were already subject to malevolent ecological transformation at the time 
he wrote (Williams 2013; Anda 2015).
In contrast to García Márquez’s imagined village of Macondo, the river was 
real. The protagonists of Love in the Time of Cholera (1988) travel it to heal the 
pain in their hearts. The General in His Labyrinth (2015) explains the meaning of 
the river in detail for the people who lived on its shores, and the suffering they 
and other creatures experienced as a consequence of its deterioration: “fish will 
have to learn to walk on land because the water will end.” Gabo described how 
“alligators ate the last butterfly, and gone are the maternal manatees, parrots, 
monkeys, peoples” (1988: 55, 185). Elsewhere, however, the Magdalena is reborn 
through the power of love; life is always stronger than death. Gabo’s fantasy of 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 139
returning to his youth was about living in a boat on the river, because he learned 
more on it than he had in school, and more profoundly. He thought of it as dead 
yet capable of renewal—but it would take a century of reforestation from the 
disasters of private ownership and pollution, both to restore the river itself and 
to make life palatable for those who relied on its supply of water, long contaminated (García Márquez 1981).
In response to the Magdalena’s evident decay, citizens’ letters to newspaper 
editors in Colombia have told stories, made appeals, and launched critiques of 
those responsible for the great river. Their imaginative prose and passionate concern index both the legends summarized by Fals Borda and Gabo’s realismo 
mágico. We look next at the lineaments of that genre and its place alongside the 
cultural meaning of the river, inquiring into organically emergent audience emotions, rather than those sought by advocates and social scientists. Popular 
responses to the horrendous contamination of the Río Magdalena show a passionate rejection of hyper-consumption—and the persistence of violence.
Letters to the Editor
It is easy to write off, so to speak, letters to the editor as of minimal significance—
venues for slightly dotty retired British army officers to claim sightings of spring’s 
first cuckoo (Gregory 1976) or places where readers with too much time and 
newsprint on their hands offer pedantic corrections to stories. Journalists are 
notoriously dismissive of these letters, regarding them as little more than minor 
sources of market intelligence (Wahl-Jorgensen 2002; Raeymaeckers 2005; da 
Silva 2013; Craft et al. 2016). The letters-to-the-editor section can also be rarefied. 
It appeals to minorities of the population and can stimulate conspiracy theories, 
while its results in terms of science are ambivalent, with anti-evolutionary ideology prominent (Karlsson et  al. 2015; Silva and Lowe 2015; Slavtcheva-Petkova 
2016). And under authoritarian regimes, such letters can be sources of problematic legitimation (Fielder and Meyen 2015).
In addition, they tend to exclude the least powerful in societies. Even though 
the technology gap in urban Colombia is not huge—most citizens have access to 
cellphones and a significant percentage participate in social media—racial and 
class barriers in everyday life translate to the virtual world, which is generally 
used by the popular classes to meet and express feelings interpersonally rather 
than collectively. It is not seen as a route to political participation or expression. 
This is due to the exhaustion that racial minorities experience in a fundamentally 
unequal, segregated society where civic participation has been systematically 
denied them (Barrios 2016; Salcedo 2016). We saw in chapter 2 how an online 
campaign was essentially an intra-elite dispute at play.
But letters to the editor, albeit unrepresentative of societies, do form part of 
the democratic process. Consider the serious, sensuous, fascinating debates 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
140 The Per sistence of Violence
between readers and journalists that occur in, for example, the Economist’s letters 
page: this venerable genre might be a guide to the participatory ethos of socalled social media. For what was once the only way of replying to a newspaper’s 
reports and claims is also a model for Twitter, comment strings, and other forms 
of popular gossip and critique (Ihlebæk and Krumsvik 2015). Rasmus Kleis 
Nielsen describes letters to the editor as
a fragmented contentious zone between politics, the media, and the private life of 
the limited number of citizens who get a chance to express themselves through 
the concrete operations of one of the institutions that gives the abstraction “the 
public debate” whatever reality it has. (2010: 21)
He identifies three tendencies: “storytelling, criticism, and appeal.” Together, 
they enable letters to the editor to help constitute a potentially vigorous environmental counter–public sphere, especially when coverage of activism and critique 
are loaded toward anthropocentrism, as is the case in South America (Pinto 
et al. 2017).
The depth of feeling experienced and expressed by letter writers incarnates 
their potential commitment, sometimes in response to disasters that are sudden 
and prominent, sometimes as reactions to more subtle stories beyond the headlines. We examined their language in highly charged discussions of the difficulties confronting the Magdalena and its inhabitants, via content analysis of 5,425 
letters to the editor between 1999 and 2008  in the El Tiempo and El Heraldo
newspapers. In accordance with their respective circulation figures, 90 percent 
of the data came from El Tiempo.
Our unit of analysis was the paragraph, because the letters frequently referred 
to more than one theme. Using QDA Miner software, we put keywords associated with the environment in context and carried out simultaneous searches 
focused on climate change. Categories emerged organically from the data (Ryan 
and Bernard 2003; Guest et al. 2012). Over 650 paragraphs were organized in a 
database. They mentioned risks, accidents, collapses, rainy seasons, floods, rivers, creeks, water, badlands, mountains, disasters, the natural environment, 
emergencies, the Red Cross, civil defense, and relief.13
The letters had four main political-economic themes: citizenship, domestic 
policy, international policy, and the production of newspapers (Barrios 2013, 
2017). Many writers were very emotive in their accounts of the conflict, and a 
number focused with equivalent passion on the environment and climate 
change—595 letters expressed views on sensitive ecological issues to do with the 
Magdalena.
The research discloses a mixture of emotions and expectations about the 
river, indicating its salience and importance to readers—a nostalgia for its original condition and an embrace of its national significance.  The “great river 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 141
Magdalena” was a prominent saying, along with frequent expressions of sadness 
and disappointment at the negligence of the authorities and the apathy of 
citizens—and joy at projects that gave the Río the importance it deserves. Consider this text:
A letter from our incomparable poet José Asunción Silva to his relatives in Bogotá 
says, “I’m on a train from Calamar to Cartagena. . . . I think of Cartagena as 
Colombia’s golden gates and Calamar as the nation’s lobby, because everything 
that comes into the country enters through Cartagena, then by train to Calamar 
before being transported along the Río Magdalena for all of Colombia to enjoy, 
including Barranquilla,” as there were no highways in those days. (El Heraldo, 
November 20, 1999)
Another letter, a decade later, said:
One Sunday in December 1966 . . . [,] peeking through a small window, I spotted 
a large flamingo in the Caño de la Auyama, a tributary to the River Magdalena. It 
table 2. Percentage of key words in paragraphs, 1999–2008
El Tiempo El Heraldo Total
Keywords Paragraphs % Paragraphs % Paragraphs %
Water 93 14.3 64 9.8 157 24.1
River 89 13.7 39 6 128 19.6
Risk 52 8 17 3 69 11
Natural Environment 40 6.1 13 2 53 8.1
Accident 40 6.1 9 1.4 49 7.5
Emergency 25 3.8 6 0.9 31 4.8
Rainy season 19 2.9 8 1.2 27 4.1
Rain 12 1.8 14 2.1 26 4.0
Magdalena River 6 0.9 17 2.6 23 3.5
Bogotá River 16 2.5 0 0 16 2.5
Creek 1 0.15 14 2.1 15 2.3
Mountains 10 1.5 5 0.8 15 2.3
Disaster 9 1.4 3 0.5 12 1.8
Sierra Nevada 6 0.9 0 0 6 0.9
Red Cross 3 0.5 3 0.5 6 0.9
Relief 2 0.3 3 0.5 5 0.8
Collapse 4 0.61 0 0.0 4 0.61
Badlands 4 0.6 0 0 4 0.6
Civil defense 1 0.2 2 0.3 3 0.5
Flood 3 0.46 0 0 3 0.46
Total 435 67 217 34 652 100
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
142 The Per sistence of Violence
had long legs, a long neck, a downturned beak, and pink plumage. . . . Today, 
forty years later, I no longer see these beautiful birds—just rotten waters full of 
excrement. (El Heraldo, June 2, 2008)
These texts have a literary tone that describes the river as a spoiled but still creative force; it has clearly inspired ordinary writers as well as Gabo. Hope for 
recovery of the river awakens joy in readers, who express approval for initiatives 
that seek to solve the problems besetting it:
Barranquilla and the Caribbean coast in general welcomed the River Avenue 
project.14 It met a yearning across generations of people who did not think of the 
area as a national tourist attraction. It is a great pleasure to watch the sunset and 
the dawn between the murmur of waves and currents, to bear witness to the 
ephemeral idyll noted by the poet Julio Flórez, and the perennial kiss that the 
river shares with the sea. . . . [C]leaning up the river is primordial: the morning 
glory and the hyacinths that form on its banks are cleaned or sanitized to avoid 
unpleasant odors. . . . God willing, we shall see the realization of desires that 
course through our beloved Barranquilla. (El Heraldo, July 7, 2006)
The Great Pact for the Recuperation of the Río Grande de la Magdalena must 
become part of our national purpose, with the full backing of political leaders. This is the only way to return the River Magdalena to its glory as the engine of 
development in the region and a place where Colombia unites. El Heraldo’s participation in this noble campaign to create citizen culture and consciousness 
about the river is a significant contribution that further embellishes this important publishing house. (El Heraldo, November 29, 1999)
If Bogotá could control the river that bears its name so that its rubbish only contaminated Sabana [de Bogotá], we could say that this was a problem for the capital and the province. But because these effluents flow into the Magdalena and 
adversely affect other regions, they become a national issue, originating in the 
capital. It’s a great pity that resources that could improve the state of the Magdalena have been cut. (El Tiempo, February 18, 2008)
Letter writers lament the lack of potable water and basic infrastructure in towns 
on the banks of the Magdalena and other tributaries:
I congratulate our Governor for including in his plans a particular priority. As he 
put it, “I’ll give special treatment to the water problem.”  It is inconceivable—
inexplicable—that the inhabitants of the banks of the generous River Magdalena 
must endure grievous water scarcity when they live so close to this precious, 
sacred liquid. (El Heraldo, May 19, 2004)
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 143
People living by other major rivers, such as the Amazon, report similar deficiencies in the supply of drinking water:
I had the wonderful experience of spending a year in Puerto Nariño, the principal 
municipality in Amazonas province, and I dare to denounce the neglect of this 
place and its people: they do not have drinking water, and they line up both to 
drink from and to pollute the river, with all the health problems that entails. They 
have three phone booths, which only function during office hours, and weather 
permitting (a rarity in Amazonas). But what concerns me most is electricity; they 
have only one plant, and in addition to making monstrous noises, it only works 
for a few hours in the afternoon—when the Mayor’s office has the money to buy 
fuel, and when it’s not damaged (which is the case several times a year). In the 
afternoon, with the temperature above 40 degrees and 80 percent humidity, you 
can’t eat, work, or even rest. I hope the Government takes action to counter this 
abandonment of its people, given there is sufficient infrastructure to export 
energy to other countries. (El Tiempo, July 10, 2004)
This recurrent problem is addressed in the following letter:
How can it be that we have an abundance of water through two oceans, the Magdalena, Amazonas, and underground currents, but half our inhabitants lack access 
to this vital and irreplaceable resource? Twenty-five million of our countrymen 
consume poor-quality water. The remainder enjoy pure, uncontaminated water, 
much of which they waste. (El Tiempo, January 15, 2000)
Numerous letters appeal to the government to find permanent solutions to the 
environmental problems affecting vulnerable populations, especially those living on the river’s banks:
I do not know whether hidden interests have constructed our forestry legislation. 
It certainly assists multinationals. When laws are passed without great scrutiny or 
analysis of their costs and benefits, that inevitably excites suspicion. It makes one 
sad to think that the nation’s leaders do not concentrate on the need to protect its 
future. Why is there such a lack of environmental consciousness when the rest of 
the world acts to protect its ecosystems and water resources? Without a credible 
opposition, politicians just do what they want. Now they are looking to privatize 
water. (El Tiempo, December 19, 2005)
The lack of official solidarity with coastal peoples who must deal with a harsh 
winter season is amazing. Poor people have always lived there. Their difficulties 
are not of their making: we have invested in massive development that has 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
144 The Per sistence of Violence
polluted the River. Again and again, we fail to apply the resources necessary 
to solve, once and for all, problems with rivers and dykes that arise every year. 
(El Tiempo, March 20, 2008)
If we do not end deforestation . . . if we fail to reform our land use, starting with 
the highlands where our rivers begin, we will be left with regular, devastating 
flooding. Putting levees in lower Cauca is useless. I hope that next year I shall not 
feel obliged to write these words yet again. (El Tiempo, January 5, 2000)
The Magdalena and other waterways have been casualties of the conflict as well 
as industrialization, because the guerrilla used them as battlefields and weapons 
to pressure the government. They bombed sections of the country’s oil pipelines, such as Transandino, causing major environmental disasters—massive oil 
spills that killed uncountable numbers of species. Letters to the editor indicate 
readers’ anger and grief. They call for the exclusion of natural resources and 
underprivileged communities from armed conflict:
How can we say everyone should respect everything, when we have birds without forests? Rivers without fish? Land without crops? Crops without water? Pets 
with brutal owners?  Riverbeds without rivers?  People who must use oxygen 
masks to breathe?  Where children have no fathers, no brothers—no family at 
all? What will become of the children without friends? Should we have freedom 
without order?  God said about the world: I welcome you all; you can live in 
peace. (El Tiempo, December 17, 2005)
The ELN, with all the arrogance that characterizes it, has made a very unclear 
proposal. They speak of a bilateral truce. Is this a real cease-fire, where they release 
hostages and end kidnapping, extortion, laying mines, burning vehicles, destroying pipelines, and poisoning rivers? Or is it a truce so that our Army will leave them 
alone so they can continue their war against the Colombian people? (El Tiempo, 
July 13, 2004)
It would be good to compile all the atrocities committed by the terrorists of the 
FARC over the past 40 years. . . . Likewise, the number of gas cylinders launched 
to destroy barracks, schools and health centers; the amount of spilled oil that has 
polluted our rivers and fields; the tons of exported drugs. (El Tiempo, May 31, 2014)
Conclusion
As Martha Nussbaum says, “Emotions directed at the geographical features of a 
nation are ways of channeling emotions towards its key commitments—to 
inclusiveness, equality, the relief of misery, the end of slavery” (2013: 2). In this 
case, readers’ letters aim to push their compatriots and decision makers to pre-
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Green Passion Afloat 145
serve natural resources in general, and rivers in particular. Veritable rivers of 
emotions surround these citizens’ criticisms and appeals for drinking water and 
sewage services for populations on the banks of the Magdalena. Many letters call 
for urgent action to stop the contamination caused by mining, industrial waste, 
and the conflict. The expressions of emotion amount to a local yet telling 
instance of how Colombians relate to “their” river.
The kind of environmental mobilization needed across conservative and progressive thinking alike is exemplified in these passionate engagements. Given 
global-warming forecasts, and absent major mitigation, the likely future for 
Colombia is for a hotter and more arid country (Salazar et al. 2018). That is the 
responsibility of countries far beyond the Magdalena, of course; but local efforts 
to halt untrammelled development are crucial—hence the violence done to traditional owners of Colombian territory by enforcers hired by multinationals that 
seek maximal mining and agricultural opportunities and minimal democratic 
regulation.
The degradation of land by farming and mineral extraction must be stemmed. 
Ideas of ethical consumption pale beside such crucial interventions:
We were able to think we were modern only as long as the various ecological crises could be denied or delayed. . . . When the first tremors of the Apocalypse are 
heard, it would seem that preparations for the end should require something 
more than simply using a dif­ferent kind of lightbulb . . . a timid appeal to buy new 
garbage cans. (Latour 2009: 462)
The Magdalena River has triggered popular writers’ affection for the nation, reaffirming some core social values and collective goals. We see great value in such 
commentaries, alongside other ways in which the discourse of emotions is 
applied to ecological crises. Given the significance of such commitments for 
developing and maintaining environmental consciousness, letters to the editor 
even model readers communicating with media outlets via newer platforms.
Perhaps none of these writers has produced imagery of the quality of Gabo, 
but they express a commitment as great as his to a precious world under threat 
from the violence of capital, the state, and the guerrilla alike. If their commitments can blend with those of scientists and traditional owners, a new, postdevelopment force may mobilize to protect the Magdalena and other natural 
resources against the attacks of development and conflict.