This book emerged from my desire to understand the history and 
present moment of violence in Colombia, as incarnated in popular culture. It 
bears in mind the immediate and vital question of a putative end to the conflict 
involving the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (the FARC) and 
other guerrilla1—a conflict that has gripped the nation during the lifetime of virtually all its citizens. But the book does not principally focus on that issue. 
Instead, it considers violence “beyond” the conflict, as simultaneously an ordinary and extraordinary part of Colombian life; something both normal and 
shocking, accepted and reviled—and contested.
My personal experience of Colombia dates from inaugurating the country’s 
first doctoral program in communications, at the Universidad del Norte in Barranquilla in 2011. I subsequently worked for twelve weeks a year at UniNorte 
across three annual visits between 2014 and 2018, giving graduate classes when in 
Colombia, and advising doctoral students and researching and writing with faculty then and while away. I also taught for some months at the Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar in Cartagena de Indias in 2019. Over my time spent on the 
Caribbean coast, I have addressed various topics related to the popular and violence, on my own and with colleagues. I learnt much from them and from students. The Persistence of Violence is the product of those efforts, and several 
chapters involve coauthors, from Barranquilla, Bogotá, and Medellín.
So unlike many scholars from the Global North who write about Colombia, 
I did not study the country in college or graduate school; nor did I go there to do 
fieldwork. My research may therefore suffer from a lack of formal training—but 
benefit from an immersion in learning and teaching, and a network of contacts of 
the kind that can become available to an established, and fortunate, professor.
The fundamental theme animating The Persistence of Violence is that Colombia’s headline story, about the peace process with the FARC and attendant controversies, may not deal adequately with a fundamental contradiction of the 
nation, famously identified by Gabriel García Márquez in his pictorial essay Por 
Copyright 2020. Rutgers University Press.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES
AN: 2318048 ; Toby Miller.; The Persistence of Violence : Colombian Popular Culture
Account: undeloan.main.eds
2 The Per sistence of Violence
un país al alcance de los niños (A Country for Children) (1998). Gabo, as he is 
known in the region, wrote evocatively about a common dualism within the 
population that spanned generosity and violence, warmth and hatred. He 
described a powerful bifurcation coursing through Colombia, the product of its 
particular pattern of invasion, dispossession, and enslavement. This resulted in a 
restless quest to identify the subject of violence—is it the nation, the right, the 
left, the landowners, the state? At one point in La mala hora (The Hour of Evil), 
Gabo says: “Es todo el pueblo y no es nadie” (It’s the whole town and it’s nobody) 
(García Márquez 1987: 89).
He spoke of a place that was two countries in one—the ideal and the real—
with all the associated paradoxes of a semiotic encounter between langue and 
parole, the abstract and the everyday:
• A proclivity for making laws and ignoring them
• A cathexis onto paperwork amid contempt for bureaucratic norms
• A dedicated work ethic and love of get-rich-quick schemes
• A taste for creating icons, then ridiculing and bringing them down
• An obsession with sporting triumph and failure, greater than any identification with human suffering
• A love of life mixed with murderous tendencies
• An adoration of animals but neglect of the loss of species and the environment in general, alongside imperilment of one of the world’s great rivers
• A loathing of negative international stereotypes of Colombia while failing to 
admit that the reality may be worse (García Márquez 1998: 10–11)
García Márquez deemed Colombians capable of both the noblest and the most 
abject acts imaginable, in a world where it seemed anyone might do anything, 
from the beautiful to the horrendous. Like many others, I have found this 
duality—bizarrely akin to Barthes’s renowned binary list, “J’aime, je n’aime pas” 
(I like, I don’t like) (1994: 116–117)—enormously suggestive.
Gabo’s topics enumerated above inspired the themes covered in the chapters 
to follow. The book you hold in your hands examines violence in Colombia as 
reflected, refracted, generated, and criticized at specific sites:
• Football, narcotraficantes, and militarism
• Tourism, sexual exploitation, and imperialism
• Journalism, narconovelas, and gender
• The environment and emotion
Victor Hugo is reported to have satirized the 1863 Colombian Constitution as 
“faite des anges” (written for angels) (quoted in Blanquer and Gros 1996).2 The 
nation labors under what the Financial Times calls “extreme legalism”: a bewil-
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 3
dering array of laws and courts of review, matched only by its bewildering array 
of lawbreakers (Rathbone and Long 2018). This collective irony is emblematized 
by Francisco José de Paula Santander Omaña, the man regarded as the country’s 
founding parent of law following independence who was in fact a key figure in 
maintaining an intransigent political-economic elite (Calvino Ospina 2008: 13).
The apparent lawfulness of what has been a political democracy for six decades 
leads many outsiders to admire seemingly significant governmental initiatives. 
For example, the International Organization for Migration details well-codified 
Colombian legislation forbidding sexual violence (Organización Internacional 
para las Migraciones 2015); the world’s most famous liberal philosopher praises it 
for policies protecting women (Rawls 1999: 110); and the state produces impressivelooking reports for the UN’s Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (2017). But anyone with material knowledge knows 
that this is one more case where policing, the courts, government, and everyday 
life are distant from such ideals and claims. Hence the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) producing an Integrity Review
as part of deciding on Colombia’s accession to the group and to propose a way 
forward to genuine peace (2017). It continues to find major flaws in the country’s 
claims that it is implementing the Organisation’s Anti-Bribery Convention 
(OECD Working Group on Bribery 2019). For the long-standing and contemporary reality is that many citizens bribe public officials as a matter of course. 
They regard Colombia as a profoundly corrupt blend of collusive private and 
public interests, clientelism, fraudulent elections, and criminal-justice abuses 
(Transparency International and Chr. Michelson Institute 2013; Transparency 
International 2017).
The situation is summed up in the idiomatic expressions (not unique to 
Colombia, but particularly popular there) “Hecha la ley, hecha la trampa” (When 
you pass a law, you create a loophole) and “muy viva” (truly alive)—the notion 
that one must be slyly on the make to be fully “with it.” For example, the mythic 
vivo (street sharp), makes his living from the tonto (fool) who actually bothers to 
work in the formal economy. This is a means of dealing with the duality of a supposedly open capitalist system governed by rules and open to competition, versus the reality of stubbornly immobile oligarchies and oligopolies.
That inevitably leads to stereotypes from foreign observers. It is a shock, 
even from this distance, to read Darwin referring to “the savages of Colombia” 
(2008: 307). A century and a half later, Eric Hobsbawm alarmingly described 
the country as “a naturally bloodthirsty culture” (1994: 52). Edgar Morin typifies Colombia as taking the underside to all societies and internationalizing it 
via drugs (Baudrillard and Morin 2004: 61). This puts such thinkers uncomfortably close to elites in Bogotá and Washington, who speak “as if Colombians had 
an innate propensity to shed one another’s blood” (Hylton 2006: 8) and the 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
4 The Per sistence of Violence
common local discourse arguing that Colombia is a “sick” society (Woodward 
2018). The head of the Instituto Colombiano de Medicina Legal (Colombian 
Institute of Legal Medicine) reflected on the 2016 peace accord by saying that 
the population had interiorized violence as ordinary conduct. Its form might 
alter with history, but a dark underlying reality still characterized the nation 
(Valdés 2017).
Alongside Gabo’s imaginative cultural interpretations and others’ Olympian 
generalizations, some basic definitions and data are necessary in order to comprehend the grisly phenomenon of Colombia’s persistent violence. The statistics 
and stories make chilling reading:
• Millions killed over the life of the country
• The largest national displacement of a citizenry in history
• The ongoing kidnapping, murder, and “disappearance” of activists3 and 
journalists
• Levels of domestic and street violence that both color and transcend the 
conflict
Mass killings in what is now Colombia began with the Spanish state’s attacks on 
the Muisca people in 1595. The Catholic Church collaborated: it sought the 
destruction of alternative religious materials and customs, with information 
obtained through torture and punishment gladly meted out (González and 
González 2007: 60–61). Ever since, human devastation has taken so many forms, 
and in so many, often isolated, parts of the country, that even with the increasingly systematic collection of data, judicial and medical statisticians, the police, 
and peace activists all doubt the reliability of the numbers they come up with 
and compare, which tend to stress urban violence, neglecting rural realities 
(Rubio 2000; Cumbre Agraria et al. 2018).
Of the quarter-of-a-million people killed by firearms worldwide in 2016, half 
perished in the Americas, with Colombia a leading contributor (Global Burden 
of Disease 2016 Injury Collaborators 2018). The first official Colombian homicide figures, from 1938, counted sixteen murders per hundred thousand residents. The ratio diminished with the introduction of limited hours of alcohol 
availability, but was spurred on again by contests over cocaine production and 
distribution, increasing in the 1950s and hovering between twenty and thirty 
deaths per hundred thousand until a dramatic hike in the 1980s, from forty to 
eighty. (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2014: 22–23, 26, 37, 75–76). 
By 2015, the ratio had fallen to seventeen, but that was still almost double the 
level considered to be endemic (Guerrero and Fandiño-Losada 2017).
Both Human Rights Watch (2015) and the Colombian government (“Colombia’s Santos” 2015) estimate that well over two hundred thousand people have been 
killed and almost eight million displaced in “the conflict” since the 1960s—but the 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 5
state only began systematic collection of these data in 1985, and 85 percent of murders probably elude human-rights discourse (Human Rights Watch 2017: 152). 
They are often defined as “common crime” (W. Tate 2007: 4) but approach warlike 
figures, especially with three thousand people a year kidnapped at the turn of the 
century and an annual average between 1990 and 2010 of 1,800 (see figure  1) 
(Pécaut 2001; Bergman 2018: 64).
In 2018, the state announced that the conflict had claimed 262,197 lives—of 
whom just 46,813 were combatants (Romero 2018), with the paramilitares specializing in mass killings and disappearances, the guerrilla in kidnapping, and the 
military in falsifying the number of enemies killed by counting civilians they had 
murdered (Hunt 2009; Uribe Alarcón 2011; Aranguren Romero 2017: 2–3; 
Human Rights Watch 2017; Bergman 2018: 64). The Institute for Economics & 
Peace’s Global Terrorism Index ranks the country in 27th  place worldwide, 
28 points above any other South American state (2018: 38). Improvised explosive devices killed 221 Colombians in 2018, up from 57 the year before (Oquendo 
2019). Since the FARC came out of jungle hideouts in 2017, handed over their 
arms, and moved to supposedly safe areas, many have been assassinated: 31 in 
2017, 65 in 2018, and 77 in 2019 (Torrado 2019; United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia 2019). Official figures for 2019 list over ten thousand homicides 
in the first eleven months, up more than 2 percent on 2018 (“Colombia cierra” 
2019). One wonders how the nation could embark on “a new era of post-conflict 
when the paramilitary’s surmounting debt with humanity is nowhere close to 
being paid” (Hristov 2014: xviii; see also Manrique Rueda and Tanner 2016; 
Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica 2018b).
How to explain the persistent violence? Colombia’s mythic nineteenthcentury liberator, Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar Palacios Rate x 1,000K inhabitants
Date (Year)
figure 1. Colombian homicide rate per hundred thousand people, 1938–2014. (Source: 
Guerrero and Fandiño-Losada, 2017.)
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
6 The Per sistence of Violence
Ponte y Blanco, thought of the “new” Americans as bicultural products of usurping 
Spaniards and resistant indigenous folk, and hence inheritors of both a rulegoverned struggle to impose empire and a fiercely elemental refusal of invasion 
and conquest (Villota Galeano 2017). The reality was that the violence of the 
conquista (conquest) amplified following independence, as the new criollo rulers 
(direct descendants of the Spanish) sought to take over, govern, and exploit more 
and more territory in order to confirm their colonization, statehood, and economic future (Colmenares 1996). Bolívar’s remarkable 1815 letter from Jamaica 
leaves no doubt as to his preferred identity. Even though he acknowledges Spanish “[a]trocities [that] transcend the limits of human perversity,” refers to a 
“genocide,” and regards slavery as “inherently corrupt,” Bolívar says “natives [must] 
become civilized,” and deems Columbus to be “the creator of our hemisphere” 
(2003: 13, 18, 26–27). That mythic version of the struggle for independence has 
been handed down over generations. It denies the role of Afro-descendant and 
indigenous Colombians in the movement (Cote 2019) and sidesteps Bolívar’s 
own taste for violence (García Márquez 1998).
Local and foreign novelists, essayists, activists, survivors, fighters, and social 
scientists have endeavored to explain the long and disturbing history of Colombia’s violence (Farnsworth-Alvear et al. 2017).4 These violentólogos attribute the 
nation’s violent characteristics to numerous causes in addition to those mentioned by Gabo and Bolívar (García Villegas 2015). They include the following:
• A topography that militates against the effective government of numerous 
regions (Cauca, Antioquia, the Andes, and the north coast) with people left 
to fight for terrain and power in the absence of a functioning state
• Machismo
• Systematic class inequality
• Discrimination against indigenous and Afro-descended Colombians
• Marxism
• The role of the United States, from the creation of the Panama Canal to Plan 
Colombia and Peace Colombia (today’s military policies)
• The World Bank making Colombia a template for development via the exploitation of natural resources and antisocialist strategies
• The Janus face of neoliberalism, as a blend of economic deregulation and statist reformation of citizens
• Cross-generational oligarchy
• Media dominated by clientelist and familial ties to politics
• Paramilitary, guerrilla, and mafia forces
• Kidnapping, drug dealing, and the informal economy
• A state riddled with corruption
• Public distrust of the police, the judiciary, and politics
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 7
Since the 1960s, being in a “state of siege” has become routine in Colombia, 
enabling exponential growth in the size, reach, and violence of the military and 
its U.S. partners. Emergency is a daily condition; counterinsurgency, a norm of 
political organization (Aranguren Romero 2017: 13–14). No surprise, then, that 
the late 2019 nationwide protests against neoliberal authoritarianism saw 170,000 
troops mobilized within moments (“Colombia Anti-Government” 2019).
The country “is synonymous with ‘violence’” in a “global imagination . . . of 
kidnappings and assassinations” (Karl 2017: 1). In the eyes of “most international 
observers, violence remains the primary evidence of Colombian national failure” (W. Tate 2007: 31)—what Alfredo Molano has called its “diabólica inercia” 
(diabolical inertia) (2001: 13). No wonder Ana María Ochoa Gautier describes 
violence as the country’s “foundational myth” (2014: 159) and Idelber Avelar 
avows that it “has come to represent Latin America’s ultimate instance of violence as a constant, pervasive element in the nation’s self-definition” (2004: 20).
For many Colombians, familial violence, from murder to sexual assault, is “a 
daily occurrence,” generally associated with machismo, alcohol, narcotics, and 
unemployment. As a consequence, the streets often feel safer to children than their 
homes, leading to new forms of criminality and violence deriving from drug use 
and truancy (Moser and McIlwaine 2000: 3–4). Polling indicates that many 
Colombians endorse personal and systematic violence alike. Half the urban population believes in taking force into their own hands and killing to protect their 
families. A third favors eliminating criminality through limpieza social (social 
cleansing) and deploying corporal punishment against children (Guerrero and 
Fandiño-Losada 2017). It is estimated that 39 percent of children under the age of 
4 have suffered such physical assaults at home (Cuartas 2018). And while Law 294 
of 1996 only permits parents to “correct them and sanction them moderately,” 
Civil Code 1883 allows “violent punishment in the home” (Global Initiative 2018).
Comparative social psychology proposes that authoritarian conservative ideology is close to Colombians’ sense of a national self and may involve a certain 
admiration for violence when associated with success (Espinosa Pezzia et al. 2017). 
Public-opinion research suggests that just half the population favors democracy 
over other forms of government—a lower percentage than in most of the 
continent—and voter turnout is the lowest across Latin America (Hellinger 2015: 
8, 397). Such attitudes, born of a history of intense malevolence, contrast with 
much of the Global North (Puig-i-Abril and Rojas 2018). True believers in biological roots of conduct throw their hands in the air when thinking about 
Colombia (Raine 2013: 125) or blame it on the “decivilizing” antics of “gangs of 
drugged or drunken hooligans” (Pinker 2011: 437).
Prior to explaining the history and contemporaneity of this violence and outlining the chapters to come, I want to spend some time working in more conceptual detail on two key themes: violence and the popular.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
8 The Per sistence of Violence
Violence
Across the globe, violence is one of the world’s most pressing yet enduring issues. 
From time immemorial, it has been a key theme of religion, social organization, 
family dynamics, and politics—a central concern of public policy, social movements, academic research, journalism, drama, fiction, military strategy, godbothering, and policing. In other words, violence is a universal problem. Whether 
we look at nuclear weaponry, civil war, or domestic assault, violence stalks both 
social and interpersonal relations. I cannot imagine newspapers, current-affairs 
programs, or congressional debates without it.
Colombians under the age of 75 have no experience of life beyond the conflict/
civil war that began in the 1940s. For women around the world, both the street and 
the home can be places where violence must be avoided on a daily basis (Goel and 
Goodmark 2015). The World Health Organization (WHO) (2017) estimates that a 
third of women have suffered physically at the hands of lovers. For working-class 
U.S. youth, the military is a “poverty draft” (Mariscal 2006). Australians date their 
emergence as a nation from the bloody attempt to invade Turkey in 1915 (McKay 
2018). French and U.S. citizens rise to national anthems celebrating weaponry and 
slaughter. Colombians sing along to words glorifying the fact that their land 
emerged from “surcos de dolores” (furrows of pain) and “se baña en sangre de 
héroes” (bathes in the blood of heroes).5 Marginalized, low-income groups in 
Colombia came up with sixty dif­ferent definitions of violence in the late 1990s, with 
most connected to economic deprivation (Moser and McIlwaine 2000: 2). Such 
linguistic distinctions may derive from profound experience: regression analysis 
correlates violence with income inequality across Colombia’s regions like no other 
factor, while at the urban level key elements also include poverty, the labor market, 
and education (Cotte Poveda 2012, 2011). Bogotá’s incapacity to keep its citizens safe 
and govern whole swaths of the country places under erasure its ability to govern.
Around the world, there are differences between state, group, and interpersonal violence; between planned and passional violence; and between fatal and 
nonfatal forms. And even free-speech absolutists worry that hateful language, 
whether interpersonal or demagogic, may index or provoke violence. The WHO 
favors this broad definition:
The intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or community, that either results in or has 
a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment or deprivation. It takes the forms of self-directed violence, interpersonal 
violence and collective violence. (2002)
That focus on intentionality, power, and threats has set the tone for many scholars, states, and activists (Lee 2019).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 9
The OECD specifies political violence as
the use of force towards a political end that is perpetrated to advance the position 
of a person or group defined by their political position in society. Governments, 
state militaries, rebels, terrorist organisations and militias engage in political violence, 
as well as actors who may adopt both political and criminal motives. (2016: 20)
It describes social violence like this:
a broader manifestation of grievances, criminal behaviours and interpersonal violence in society. These include multiple types of crime, homicides, and interpersonal and self-directed violence. (2016: 20)
The United Nations defines violence against women as
any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, 
sexual, or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, 
coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life. (1993)
Official pronouncements and statistics clearly don’t cover the totality of violence. But they derive from scholarly and social-movement influences as well as 
governmental ones and affect the way we calculate the phenomenon’s dimensions. They must be understood through the lens of theoretical reasoning, 
whether via philosophy or faith.
A lock on the legitimate use of force is foundational to the essence of the 
state. It is intimately bound up with the nation via mythic origins and obligations, through policing and war. Weber’s classic definition of sovereignty is of a 
“human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate 
use of physical force within a given territory” (1946: 78). Achille Mbembe modifies Weber’s account to argue that “necropolitics” is the state’s way of life, “that 
the ultimate expression of sovereignty resides, to a large degree, in the power and 
capacity to dictate who may live and who must die” (2003: 11). Both are of course 
dependent on Tolstoy’s provocation that “government is violence” (1990).
Wars are generally thought of as occurring between governments. Few theorists of war have been able to transcend von Clausewitz’s capacious yet precise 
definition of it (Sharma 2015), even if his use of the first-person plural is troubling in its certitude about the allegedly universal desire for power: “War is . . .
an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will” (von Clausewitz 1989: 75). 
Von Clausewitz avowed that it “is not merely an act of policy but a true political 
Instrument, a continuation of political intercourse, carried on with other means” 
(1989: 87).6 Yet Michael Howard suggests that wars have long been understood 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
10 The Per sistence of Violence
as “an aberration in human affairs . . . an occurrence beyond rational control,” 
and more recently as effects of masculinity, class greed, or evolutionary necessity 
(1984: 90). Those accounts still resonate, but we have some newer ones.
Institutionalist political science identifies “power theories, power transition 
theories, the relationship between economic interdependence and war, diversionary theories of conflict, domestic coalitional theories, and the nature of 
decision-making under risk and uncertainty” (Levy 1998: 139). Quantoid neoliberals advise the following:
There are two prerequisites for a war between (rational) actors. One is that the 
costs of war cannot be overwhelmingly high . . . there must be some plausible 
situations in the eyes of the decision makers such that the anticipated gains from 
a war in terms of resources, power, glory, territory, and so forth exceed the 
expected costs of conflict. Second, . . . there has to be a failure in bargaining, so 
that for some reason there is an inability to reach a mutually advantageous and 
enforceable agreement. ( Jackson and Morelli 2011)
This decontextualized game theory, founded on rational action as defined by a 
capitalist consumer mentality, dominates the deracinated world of mainstream 
political science—the reductive, selfish side of rationality (Altman 2015; Meadwell 
2016). Psychological explanations have been diminished to such assumptions 
and their cozily artificial experiments (Böhm et al. 2015); cliometricians are also 
subject to the imposing spells of this warlockcraft (Eloranta 2016; Jenke and 
Gelpi 2017).
Such approaches form part of the warfare/welfare mentality that colors U.S. 
and northern European social science, alongside service to capital. In the case of 
war, we see such forms of life adopted and encouraged by technocrats and militarists alike (Roxborough 2015). In short, mainstream academia, diplomacy, and 
the military are wedded to the notion that “war between states is to be seen in 
terms of rationally decided aggression rather than in the internationalization of 
social conflict” (Halliday 1990: 207).
Contra those perspectives, we confront J.  A. Hobson’s (1902) ideas about 
imperial conquest being driven by the capitalist problem of domestic overproduction; Marxist theories of class war caused by unequal control of the means of 
production; Maoist arguments for the peasantry as motors of revolutionary 
change; feminist critiques of masculine violence; and postcolonial insights into 
wars that derive from decolonizing cartography (Gruffydd Jones 2006).
Keynes (1936: 381) provides a succinct political-economic explanation:
War has several causes. Dictators and others such, to whom war offers, in expectation at least, a pleasurable excitement, find it easy to work on the natural bellicosity of their peoples. But, over and above this, facilitating their task of fanning the 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 11
popular flame, are the economic causes of war, namely, the pressure of population and the competitive struggle for markets
The development economist Frances Stewart (2002) advises the following:
• The incidence of war has been rising since 1950, mostly within rather than 
between states.
• Wars may be prompted by race and religion, but with underlying economic 
causes.
• The principal stimuli are political, economic, and social inequality; poverty; 
economic stagnation; poor government; high unemployment; environmental degradation; and individual incentives.
The Royal Geographical Society nominates “land disputes, politics, religious 
and cultural differences and the distribution and use of resources” as causes of 
war, while the Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research database 
finds that ideological struggle is a source of most wars, generally nested with 
other factors.7
Like states, most religions take the codification and enactment of violence as 
fundamental to their very being, as any glance at doctrines of allegedly just war 
or putatively holy tracts will attest (Finlay 2019). For true believers, deities are 
intimately bound to crime and punishment, requiring them to “root . . . out heresy, natural impulses, and evil” (Fanon 2004: 176). Virtually all religions justify 
violence under defined circumstances, and a desire for their gods to rule humanity 
with unquestioned authority (Popovski et al. 2009; Jerryson et al. 2013). Prelates 
of righteous, omniscient deities ready to judge and mete out painful punishment 
are matched by political theorists and military commanders discerning when 
and how might is right in order to make the remaining life ‘better.’ Sometimes 
these groups overlap in their membership.
The Olympian idea of violence as purifying also relates to secular revolutionary fantasies about clearing away the past to free the future. Hence Engels (1968: 
151, 154) and Rosa Luxemburg (2004: 64) saying acts of violence are ipso facto 
political, as private property only emerges from theft and assault, notably during 
primitive accumulation; Sorel (2004) and Michels (2001) viewing proletarian 
violence as a riposte to decadence that paradoxically revives the bourgeoisie; or 
Sartre naming it “the midwife of history” in his endorsement of “murderous 
rampage” as the “collective unconscious” of the colonized to their subjugation. 
One must destroy colonial authority in order to “erase the marks of violence: 
violence alone can eliminate them” (2004: 117, 127, 135). In Fanon’s words, “decolonization reeks of red-hot cannonballs and bloody knives” (2004: 165). For her 
part, Emma Goldman saw political violence as a response to “accumulated forces 
in our social and economic life,” akin to Nature’s “storm and lightning”; it “may 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
12 The Per sistence of Violence
destroy life and cause great loss,” but “also bring relief ” (1917: 1). Nietzsche 
regarded it as crucial to modernity (2002: 78).
Sexuality and gender issues are crucial to comprehending violence. Wherever 
you look, from diplomats to bombardiers to correspondents, war is an implicitly 
male activity. This is rarely if ever recognized in mainstream media coverage and 
academic knowledge, or problematized as such (Ackerly et al. 2006; Hearn 2012; 
Sjoberg 2013). But the astonishing inequality between men and women, in 
socioeconomic power and cultural representation alike, relies on the threat and 
the actuality of violence to undergird it, as exemplified in the fact that so many 
more men than women bear arms, both inside and outside the military. Violence 
between men is also important in determining who among them obtains the 
spoils of this gendered dominance, and as an index of, and displacement from, 
other crises such as economic disadvantage (Connell 2005: 82–83).
Feminist international relations theory stresses the significance of gender in 
the causes of war, emphasizing these factors at structural and interpersonal levels, from across the world system to internal dynamics within nations, including 
the masculine priorities and personalities that drive conflicts. At the level of 
mythology, the “right” way of doing violence births ideas of male nobility, from 
protective dueling knights to endless military campaigns allegedly waged in the 
name of women, whose putative vulnerability is routinely invoked as a justification for conflicts, even as they suffer from the violence that ensues (Riley et al. 
2008; Mackie 2012). Of course, the claim that women are naturally nurturing or 
pacific has not stood up to a multitude of counter-examples, from feminist guerrilla (in the FARC as elsewhere) to women who are violent to children (Enloe 
1983; Feinman 2000; Rayas Velasco 2009). But this violence is in no way symmetrical with male militarism.
Recent, rather sanguine, analyses argue that war is, so to speak, dying out. 
They rely on the Uppsala Conflict Data Program, which emphasizes state participation and battlefield casualties. The Program privileges a form of warfare that 
has been partially superseded by violence done to civilians by non-state actors 
(Kaldor 2012: 10–11). That tendency underscores that fully-fledged, declared wars 
are only the most spectacular and all-encompassing form of violence.
Popular Culture
Unsurprisingly, violence is a common theme in popular culture. Much drama 
derives from interpersonal and international conflict, many sports are dedicated 
to physical brutalization, and numerous social anxieties derive from the fear that 
representing violence may encourage it.
The word popular generally denotes “of the people,” “by the people,” and “for 
the people.” In other words, the popular both constitutes and is constituted by 
the following:
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 13
• Subjects, whom it incarnates via such genres as sports, information, and drama
• Workers, who produce performances and recordings
• Institutions, which industrialize, regulate, and sell their work
• Audiences, who interpret it
In Latin America, however, the word popular connotes the proletarian, the 
peasant, or the poor and their production of meaning: “prácticas culturales de 
las clases de bajos ingresos y/o de grupos racializados o subordinados que no se 
han domesticado al negociar su entrada en las esferas mediáticas nacionales o 
globales” (cultural practices of low-income classes and/or racialized or subordinated groups who have neither been disciplined, nor have they tailored their 
points of entry into national or global media spheres) (Yúdice 2016: 95). The 
Persistence of Violence moves easily and uneasily—as one can and must—
between hegemonic Anglo understandings of the popular and its Latin American connotations, which are both similar and dif­ferent from what one finds 
elsewhere.
The word culture derives from the Latin colere, which describes tending and 
developing agriculture (Benhabib 2002: 2; Adorno 2009: 146). With the advent 
of capitalism’s division of labor, culture paradoxically came to embody instrumentalism and to abjure it, via the industrialization of farming, on the one hand, 
and the cultivation of individual taste, on the other. Eighteenth-century Spanish, 
French, and German dictionaries document this metaphorical shift from agricultural cultivation to spiritual elevation. As the spread of literacy and printing 
saw customs and laws passed on, governed, and adjudicated through the written 
word, cultural texts supplemented and supplanted physical force as guarantors 
of authority. With the Industrial Revolution, populations urbanized, food was 
imported, and textual forms were exchanged. An emergent consumer society 
produced such events as racing, opera, exhibits, and balls. The impact of this 
shift was indexed in cultural labor: poligrafi in fifteenth-century Venice and hacks 
in eighteenth-century London wrote popular and influential conduct books. 
These works of instruction on everyday life marked the textualization of custom 
and the development of new occupations. Anxieties about cultural imperialism 
also appeared, via Islamic debates over Western domination (Mowlana 2000; 
Briggs and Burke 2003).
Immanuel Kant ideologized these commercial and imperial changes, arguing 
that culture ensured “conformity to laws without the law.” Aesthetics could generate “morally practical precepts,” schooling people to transcend particular interests via the development of a “public sense, i.e., a faculty of judging which in its 
reflective act takes account (a priori) of the mode of representation of everyone 
else . . . to weigh its judgement with the collective reason of mankind” (2007: 
123). Kant envisaged an “exit from . . . self-incurred immaturity,” independent of 
religion, government, or commerce (1996: 62).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
14 The Per sistence of Violence
Culture’s organic law and lore, and their textual manifestations, have come to 
represent each “epoch’s consciousness of itself ” (Althusser 1969: 108). As a consequence, audiences, creators, governments, and corporations make extraordinary investments in it. For imperial Britain, the study of culture formed “the core 
of the educational system.” It was “believed to have peculiar virtues in producing 
politicians, civil servants, Imperial administrators and legislators,” incarnating 
and indexing “the arcane wisdom of the Establishment” (Plumb 1964: 7) to 
reproduce and renovate what Matthew Arnold called “that powerful but at present somewhat narrow-toned organ, the modern Englishman” (1875: x).
Culture has usually been understood in two quasi-Kantian registers, via the 
social sciences and the humanities. They emerged as secular alternatives to deistic knowledge (Schelling 1914) focused on dual forms of “self-realization” (Weber 
2000)—truth and beauty. This heuristic distinction grew substantive as time 
passed (Williams 1983: 38). Culture came to be understood as a marker of differences and similarities in taste and status within groups. It could be explored 
interpretatively or methodically.
So art is understood through iconography, quality, and representativeness, as 
framed by cultural criticism and history. The social is understood through language, religion, custom, time, space, and exchange, as framed by ethnography 
and statistics. Whereas art articulates differences within populations via symbolic norms (for example, providing some of us with the cultural capital to 
appreciate high culture) the social articulates such differences via social norms 
(such as legitimizing inequality through doctrines of human capital) (Bourdieu 
1984; Wallerstein 1989). An aesthetic discourse about culture sees it elevating 
people above ordinary life, transcending body, time, and place. A folkloric discourse expects culture to settle us into society through the wellsprings of community, as part of daily existence. A populist discourse idealizes fun, offering 
secular transcendence through joy (Frith 1991: 106–07).
For some Anglo analysts, popular culture is the apex of modernity. It stands 
for the expansion of civil society—the moment in history when the state 
becomes receptive to, and part of, the general community. The general population is hence made part of the social rather than excluded from the means and 
politics of political calculation. This occurs along with diminished authority, 
augmented rights, and newly intense, large-scale human interactions that are 
necessitated by industrialization and aided by the media: the spread of advertising is taken as a model for the breakdown of social barriers, exemplifying the 
triumph of the popular (Shils 1966; Hartley 1992). “Administrative research” was 
named and valued in the 1940s and operates under this sanguine sign (Lazarsfeld 
1941). It supports technological innovation, buoyant demand, audience measurement, marketing, regulation, enforcement of property relations, and so on, 
in the name of capitalist efficiency and governmental normativity—making capitalism function by ensuring a skillful, willing, and docile populace.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 15
But popular culture also elicits critique. At the onset of European imperialism, Antonio de Nebrija wrote in his Grammar of the Castilian Language, published in the fateful year 1492, that one must systematize and promulgate an 
orthodox Spanish in order to elevate readers beyond “romances or stories” that 
consisted of “a thousand lies and errors” (2016: 203). And for centuries, the links 
between art as a form of market-based entertainment and a reflection and generator of social identities have produced very varied reactions: during Europe’s 
Industrial Revolution, anxieties about a suddenly urbanized and educated population raised the prospect of a long-feared “ochlocracy” of “the worthless mob” 
(Pufendorf 2000: 144). Ever since, theorists from both right and left have argued 
that newly literate or minimally educated publics could be manipulated by demagogues. Bourgeois economics may assume that rational consumers determine 
what is popular culture, but even neoclassical/neoliberal chorines worry that 
ordinary people can be bamboozled by unscrupulously fluent ones. Marxism 
has often viewed popular culture as a route to false consciousness that diverts 
the working class from recognizing its economic oppression; feminist approaches 
have moved between condemning the popular as a similar distraction from gendered consciousness and celebrating it as a distinctive part of women’s culture; 
and cultural studies has regarded it as a key location for the symbolic resistance 
of class, race, and gender oppression (Hall and Jefferson 1976; Mattelart 1980; 
Smith 1987).
There has been a cross-generational, cross-disciplinary emphasis on the number and conduct of audiences to popular culture: where they came from, how 
many there were, and what they did as a consequence. Such concerns are coupled with a focus on content: what were audiences watching when they. . . . Both 
audiences and texts are conceived of as empirical entities that can and must be 
known, via research instruments derived from sociology, the psy-function, criticism, demography, linguistics, communications, law, anthropology, accountancy, economics, and marketing.
Administrative research was originally juxtaposed with the anti-Nazi Frankfurt School’s critiques of popular culture, which suggest that its commercial conditions “impress . . . the same stamp on everything.” The principals of that 
School, Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer (1977), saw consumers and citizens as manipulated from the social order’s economic apex, with “[d]omination” 
masquerading as choice in a “society alienated from itself.” On this reading, culture becomes just one more industrial process, ruled by economic forces that 
diminish ideological or generic innovation in favor of standardization. That 
organizational form necessitates repetition rather than difference, because of the 
factory-like production of film, music, news, and radio.
The Frankfurt School and its adherents worry that popular culture commodifies and governmentalizes signification. As a consequence, while semiosis begins 
as a reflection of reality, commodity signs displace representations of the truth 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
16 The Per sistence of Violence
with false information. Then these two delineable phases of truth and lies 
become indistinct. Once underlying reality is lost, signs become self-referential, 
with no residual correspondence to the real: they have adopted the form of their 
own simulation (Baudrillard 1988). People are said to buy commodities to give 
meaning to their lives because societies no longer make them feel as though they 
belong. This concatenating simulation has implications for the aesthetic and 
social hierarchies that “regulate and structure . . . individual and collective lives” 
(Parekh 2000: 143) in competitive ways that harness popular culture for social 
and commercial purposes. For this reason, analysts discern close ties between 
ideological content and industrial impact.
More positive responses to popular culture also exist within critical thought. 
For example, Brecht admired, copied, and sought to transcend the popular, welcoming passionate crowds as potential sites of resistance to government and 
capital (1964). Even Adorno reflected that sports had “an anti-barbaric and antisadistic effect by means of fair play, a spirit of chivalry, and consideration for the 
weak” (2005: 196–197). Historical and contemporary analyses of slaves, crowds, 
pirates, bandits, minorities, women, and the working class have utilized archival, 
ethnographic, and statistical methods to emphasize day-to-day noncompliance 
with authority, via practices of popular-cultural consumption that frequently 
turn into practices of cultural production. For instance, U.K. research has lit 
upon Teddy Boys, Mods, bikers, skinheads, punks, school students, teen girls, 
Rastas, truants, dropouts, and magazine readers as magical agents of history—
groups who deviated from the norms of schooling and the transition to work, 
thereby generating moral panics. Scholar-activists examine the structural underpinnings to collective style, investigating how bricolage subverts the achievementoriented, materialistic values and appearance of the middle class. The working 
assumption has often been that subordinate groups adopt and adapt signs and 
objects from dominant culture, reorganizing them to manufacture new meanings. 
The oppressed become producers of new fashions, inscribing alienation, difference, and powerlessness on their bodies (Leong 1992).
A commitment to social and cultural justice as well as academic theorization 
and research has proven magnetic to many subordinate groups embarking on 
international academic exchange over the last fifty years. Hence the appeal of 
studying popular culture not only at the conventional scholarly metropoles of 
the United States and Britain, but in Colombia, Brazil, Turkey, India, and other 
important sites that are all too accustomed to being theorized and analyzed; and 
all too unfamiliar with being regarded as the sources of ideas, not merely places 
for their application.
Perhaps the foremost theorist of popular culture in critical thinking of the 
kind represented in The Persistence of Violence is Gramsci. He maintained that 
each social group creates “organically, one or more strata of intellectuals which 
give it homogeneity and an awareness of its own function not only in the economic 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 17
but also in the social and political fields”: the industrial technology, law, economy, and culture of each group. The “‘organic’ intellectuals that every new class 
creates alongside itself and elaborates in the course of its development” assist in 
the emergence of that class, for example via military expertise. Intellectuals operate in “[c]ivil society . . . the ensemble of organisms commonly called ‘private,’ 
that of ‘political society’ or ‘the State.’” They represent the “‘hegemony’ which 
the dominant group exercises throughout society” as well as the “‘direct domination’ or command exercised through the State and ‘juridical’ government.” Ordinary people give “spontaneous’ consent” to the “general direction imposed on 
social life by the dominant fundamental group” (Gramsci 1978: 5–7, 12). In other 
words, popular culture legitimizes socioeconomic-political arrangements in the 
public mind and can be a site of struggle as well as domination. Gramsci also 
crucially noted that the words for “national” and “popular” were similar in several languages, such was their affinity, and called for a closer alignment between 
everyday concerns and intellectual practice to reflect that linguistic kinship and 
animate socialism (2000: 366). The process might take dialectical form: for 
example, cinema has been the property and design of elites seeking to recruit 
the population to their projects through film’s carnivalesque expressivity and 
mythologies of upward mobility, but brokered through multinational taste cultures of a very dif­ferent kind that bring status and rewards from a cosmopolitan 
cultural élite.
Raymond Williams (1977) drew on the idea of residual, dominant, and emergent hegemonies to describe the process whereby class formations compete over 
narratives that legitimize social control. Examples of these categories might be 
the remains of an empire, a modern mixed economy, and neoliberal transformation, respectively. Extensive use has been made of Gramsci’s beyond the Global 
North, in South Asia and segments of the Arab and African worlds (Marks and 
Engels 1994; Patnaik 2004; Dabashi 2013). Across Latin America, his notion of 
the national popular harnessing class interests is common sense for both left and 
right (Massardo 1999); for example, music represented this incorporation of 
popular urges into officially-sanctioned and -enjoyed culture in many parts of 
the region from the 1920s to the 1940s (Yúdice 2016).
I well remember arriving late to a meeting in Guadalajara prior to the 2006 
presidential elections in Mexico, when it seemed likely that the left would triumph. A group had been assembled to plan a new cultural policy. I entered quietly and remained so, in part due to my lateness and in part through lack of 
familiarity with the people present. Two middle-aged men were citing Gramsci 
and Benjamin. I thought “Good grief, here we go again—leftist academics droning on about Euro theorists. Pointless.” Little did I know. For the speakers were 
both members of Congress, including a senator; one a survivor of the Tlatelolco 
massacre of 1968, the other a campaigner for media reform. Unlike my experience of the white-settler colonies and Britain, such embodied theorization was 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
18 The Per sistence of Violence
part of capital P political discourse. In Colombia, Gramsci’s ideas have been 
adopted and adapted since the 1950s by academics, social movements, arts educators, writers, the teachers’ union, and the Communist Party, which proceeded 
to endorse guerrilla resistance (Brands 2010: 17; Santofimio-Ortiz 2018).
Hegemonic cultural ideas have always mattered. They informed imperial 
expansion through the religious, civilizational fervor of Spain’s conquista de 
América (conquest of America), Portugal’s missão civilizadora, and France and 
Britain’s mission civilisatrice (civilizing mission), as western Europe sought to 
remake the globe in its own phantasmatic image (Rojas 2002). The Spanish 
wrote self-aggrandizing tracts to celebrate killing native peoples (Braudel 1984: 
393; Colmenares 1996). And from the first days of her empire, Queen Isabella’s 
functionaries established Castilian as a mode of conquest and management. 
Indeed, the imperial grammarian de Nebrija argued that “language was always 
the companion of empire.” Along with Christianity, it would enable the queen to 
“put under her yoke many barbarous peoples and nations of alien languages.” 
With physical conquest came linguistic and hence codified rule (2016: 202, 204).
The outcome was religious violence and conversion, a cohort of satraps doing 
the work of Eurocentrism, and a forceful reaction against foreign cultural domination that has never subsided, exacerbated over the last century by the global 
entertainment demesne of the United States (Mowlana 2000). This latter element is especially strong in Latin America, in keeping with the Monroe Doctrine, which was enunciated almost two centuries ago to keep Europe out of the 
Americas by declaring anything that went on in the region’s new states to be the 
business of the United States:
The Governments who have declared their independence and maintained it, and 
whose independence we have, on great consideration and on just principles, 
acknowledged, we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them, or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European 
power in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition 
toward the United States. (Richardson 2004: 1038–1039)
The Colombian government embraced this policy in 1826, referring to it as the 
“gospel of the new continent” (quoted in McPherson 2016: 17). And by midcentury, the now-established independence elites sought their own hegemonic civilización mestiza (mixed civilization). It would transcend the country’s “black and 
indigenous past” through education, faith, fashion, and conduct (Rojas 2002: xxvi).
Critiques of cultural imperialism have found significant uptake throughout 
the Global South—not least for their focus on the machinery of propaganda 
sold to ordinary people by powerful sovereign-states. Such arguments have resonated in everyday talk, broadcast and telecommunications policy, unions, international organizations, nationalistic media and heritage, cultural diplomacy, 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 19
anti-Americanism, and postindustrial service-sector planning (see Dorfman and 
Mattelart 1971; Beltrán and Fox de Cardona 1980; Schiller 1976, 1989). They are 
exemplified by Armand Mattelart’s stinging denunciation of external cultural 
influence on the Third World:
In order to camouflage the counter-revolutionary function which it has assigned 
to communications technology and, in the final analysis, to all the messages of 
mass culture, imperialism has elevated the mass media to the status of revolutionary agents, and the modern phenomenon of communications to that of revolution itself. (1980: 17)
The concern is that popular culture exported from the Global North transfers its 
dominant value system to others, through hegemony over news agencies, advertising, market research, public opinion, screen trade, technology transfer, propaganda, telecommunications, and security. There is a corresponding diminution 
in the vitality and standing of local languages, traditions, and national identities. 
As Herbert I. Schiller expressed it, “the media-cultural component in a developed, corporate economy supports the economic objectives of the decisive 
industrial-financial sectors (i.e., the creation and extension of the consumer society)” (1991: 14).
It can be no surprise that Latin Americans generated the theory of dependent 
development in the 1940s to explain why the industrial takeoff experienced by 
western Europe and the United States had not occurred elsewhere. It gained 
adherents across the Global South over the next three decades in reaction to the 
fact that rich societies at the world core had become so through their colonial 
and international ventures—importing ideas, fashions, and people from the 
periphery while exporting manufactured popular culture (Prebisch 1982; Cardoso 2009). When UNESCO formed its International Commission for the 
Study of Communication Problems in the 1970s, chaired by Séan MacBride, 
García Márquez was a member. Its landmark 1980 report, Many Voices, One 
World, resonated across the globe. Britain and the United States withdrew from 
UNESCO, in part because the Commission’s radical findings and proposals fell 
victim to the Cold War (Preston et al. 1989). This critique has enjoyed particular 
purchase in Latin America and other postcolonial states whose traditions and 
languages tie them to texts exported from the metropole. That analysis is of value 
for Colombia, given the oligarchies that run politics and the media and a dependent relationship on U.S. screen drama and music, albeit leavened by black, 
indigenous, and mestiz@ cultural production. Foreign influences have been 
enabled by successive generations of local policy makers following the Yanqui 
dictum of open communications technologies but copyrighted textual markets 
as a means to development and modernization (Dorfman and Mattelart 1971; 
Segoviana García 2011; Barranquero Carretero et al. 2017).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
20 The Per sistence of Violence
And there remains a paradox—possibly a contradiction—in critical engagements with the popular. Whenever spectacle is used effectively by social movements, advertising agencies “borrow” what they see. The fashion and music 
industries dispatch spies to watch and listen to the popular as part of a restless 
search for new trends to market. Capitalism appropriates its appropriators, and 
so do its lackey governments, as per the transmogrification of the term “culture 
industries” into “creative industries” (Miller 2012) (of which more below).
Popular culture around the globe has become ever more central to economic 
and social life: world trade in culture increased from US$559.5 billion in 2010 to 
US$624 billion in 2011 (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
2013). Popular culture has internationalized, in terms of the export and import of 
texts, attendant fears of cultural imperialism, and a New International Division 
of Cultural Labor (NICL) (Miller 2018b). A prosperous economic future supposedly lies in finance capital and ideology rather than agriculture and 
manufacturing—seeking revenue from innovation and intellectual property, not 
minerals or masses.
Popular culture offers important resources to markets and nations—reactions 
to the crisis of belonging and economic necessity occasioned by capitalist globalization. It is crucial to advanced and developing economies alike, and can 
provide the legitimizing ground on which particular groups (e.g., African Americans, lesbians, the hearing impaired, or evangelical Protestants) claim resources 
and seek inclusion in national and international narratives (see Yúdice 2002 and 
Martín-Barbero 2003 on Latin America; Colla 2012 and Pahwa and Winegar 2012 
on Egypt; Yang 2009 on China; Boateng 2011 on Ghana).
Latin American cultural policy has gone through several transformations in 
response to this commodity fetishism. The rather musty, dusty sphere of arts 
policy has become subject to intense criticism for its failure to encompass the 
popular-culture industries and their relationship to development (Yúdice 2018). 
But Latin American critics of the old patrimony approach to cultural policy—
arts and crafts—did not all wake up with sore heads from a wine-and-cheese 
gallery opening and turn into prelates of the putative creative industries. Many 
maintained and even developed their concerns about neoliberalism as it turned 
its lustful gaze toward culture. They favored an approach that blended solidarity 
and difference, through a mixture of regional policy making and taking culture 
beyond markets to recognize the issues confronting indigenous and Afrodescended peoples (Yúdice 2018).
Methodologically and theoretically, we need to be aware of the double-edged 
side to cultural commodities, as objects of resistance whose very appropriation 
can then be recommodified. That makes socioeconomic analysis via critical 
political economy a good ally of representational analysis via close reading. But a 
certain tendency on both sides has maintained that the two approaches are 
mutually exclusive: one is concerned with structures of the economy, the other 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 21
with structures of meaning. That need not be the case. Historically, the best critical political economy and the best close reading have worked through the imbrication of power and subjectivity at all points on the cultural continuum, bringing 
together the insights of Gramsci and Frankfurt. Such examples help animate 
what follows, together with an appreciation of history.
History
Eduardo Galeano put it well when he wrote that “Colombians suffer violence 
like a disease, but they do not wear it like a birthmark on their foreheads. The 
machinery of power . . . is indeed the cause of violence” (2013: 426). For like most 
sovereign-states, the nation’s history has been contoured by the earth-shattering 
concatenation of political-economic events since the eighteenth century:
• The shift from absolute monarchy to parliamentary democracy
• The social upheavals of imperialism, colonialism, slavery, war, postcolonialism, 
industrialization, urbanization, human rights, feminism, and climate change
• The expansion of global capitalism
Against that heady history of exploitation, productivity, democracy, and destruction, one scholarly tradition, populated by conservative ethnonationalists, argues 
that nations are constants across history, albeit changing their morphology with 
time and circumstance (Smith 2000). The nation is sustained through supposedly indelible ties: origin myths, languages, customs, races, and religions (Herder 
2002).
For those more in thrall to modernity, such “ties” are invented traditions 
(Hobsbawm and Ranger 2002). Far from being the outcome of abiding mythologies, the materiality and idea of the nation derived from the Industrial Revolution and imperialism, which brought places together that had not previously 
deemed themselves linked in any way. Relatively isolated, subsistence villages 
were transformed by the interdependence engendered by capitalist organizations, the commodification of everyday relations, and the sense of unity generated from nation-binding technologies and institutions, most notably print 
and public education (Gellner 1988). Since that time, the state articulates the 
nation as a spirit-in-dwelling, which gives it legitimacy, but which it nonetheless 
reserves the right to name and monitor; for nations are coterminous with systems of government. Even as the nation is manufactured, it is said to be an 
already-extant, authentic essence of statehood and personhood.
Discussions with campesinos (peasants) about political violence in Colombia 
generally return to one point of origin: the clearance of the poor from land by 
murderous means, at the hands of state, guerrilla, and paramilitar alike (Molano 
2001). That suggests the nonessentialist account of nationalism can best help us 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
22 The Per sistence of Violence
understand Colombia’s history—that is, in the light of the development and 
reproduction of national, regional, and global capitalism (Giraldo Durán and 
Álvarez de Castillo 2018).
Prior to its conquest in the first quarter of the sixteenth century, the area we 
know today as Colombia comprised distinct peoples. Those distinctions were 
ramified with the administrative geography imposed by Spain, which created 
western and eastern spheres of control (Safford and Palacios 2002). It soon 
imported West African slaves to mine gold, leaving the agricultural east largely 
intact, where indigenous populations generally survived. The colonists’ basic 
unit of social control and economic production alike was the hacienda, a sphere 
of living and working for slaves and First Peoples. The latter were required to pay 
tributes to the Spanish Crown. They lived somewhere between servitude and 
slavery throughout the colonial period (Celis González 2018: 32–33).
The Colombian nation-state was birthed, like many others, in revolutionary 
struggle over the long period of 1810 to 1824 when the Republic of New Grenada 
(now Panamá, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Colombia) won independence. The 
major beneficiaries were hacienda landholders, whose power over people and 
territory was consolidated at the expense of those with smaller holdings. The 
requirement to ‘pacify’ hitherto-neglected terrain as part of this process made 
violence a core part of extending the authority of state and capital alike and paying the costs of the war by selling off cultivable land. The formalization of land 
ownership and use militated against the peasantry, who lacked the finance to 
purchase what was physiocratically theirs. The nation’s wealth was being integrated into the world economic system after a period of economic contraction 
following independence, and class exclusion via race was a core component of 
ensuring restrictions on how that wealth was distributed internally. The process 
was in turn colored by divergent interests—conservative Catholic landowners 
and liberal urban businessmen. Manumission was achieved in 1851 and helped 
motivate intense struggle. Liberal and Conservative blocs and parties formed to 
represent dif­ferent fractions of capital and relationships to religion (Bergquist 
1991; Green 2000; Rojas 2002: xxiv; Bértola and Ocampo 2012: 66; Comisión 
Histórica 2015; Celis González 2018: 33, 35; Pino Uribe 2017).
That binary party system has plagued the country ever since. The power of 
the two blocs has essentially precluded electoral uprisings and economic 
redistribution alike; conservative, Spanish-oriented Catholics opposed Britishleaning liberals and radicals via their infamous tendency to divide people and 
formations as amigo-enemigo (friend-enemy) (Rojas 2002: xxvii; Giraldo Durán 
and Álvarez de Castillo 2018). Although this division applied in much of the 
region, it was nowhere so deep or violent as in Colombia. The blocs fought ten 
civil wars in the nineteenth century over slavery, land reform, and new institutions, driven in part by U.S. intervention in Panamá’s isthmus (then part of 
Colombia) (Deas 2015).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 23
At the close of the colonial period, the nation’s export base was dominated by 
gold and silver mined in the eastern highlands. It soon diversified, thanks to coffee, tobacco, and quinine, while hitherto-limited imports grew through consumer goods, particularly luxury items. What had been a country in name 
only—it was more a set of autonomous regions, and frequently lamented as such 
by urban intellectuals—was now subject to struggle by competing capitalists, 
governments, and social groups, alongside the denunciation of indigenous and 
Afro-Colombians as degrading development and national identity alike. In addition, there came to be not only industrialization and repositioning within the 
world economy, but also an emergent capitalist imaginary. It drew on reactionary Christianity as a moral technology but allowed for cultural heterogeneity as 
a means of justifying class hierarchies (Pécaut 1987, 2001; Bulmer-Thomas 2003: 
25, 43, 143; Castro-Gómez and Restrepo 2008; Alvarado 2012).
Colombia became one of the least secular countries in the region, in keeping 
with the large number of Church officials and priests from the colonial era. Its 
first Constitutions disavowed religious tolerance, until liberal hegemony from 
the 1850s undermined Catholic exclusivity, legalized divorce, and cut previous 
tithes. The 1860–1863 war saw liberalism triumphant. Armed with a new Constitution, Liberals exercised political dominance through the mid-1880s, when they 
were displaced by another civil war and a revised Constitution that favored the 
Catholic Church, granting it suzerainty over education and religious control of a 
third of the country. Uniquely across the region, a concordat was signed with the 
Vatican in 1888 that institutionalized Church hegemony until the 1970s, by which 
time 95 percent of Colombians affiliated with Catholicism, up from 80 percent in 
1910 (Freston 2004: 228; Schwaller 2011: 154–56, 181; Pew Research Center 2014: 
27; de la Torre and Martín 2016: 476).
Conservatives ruled until 1930 in concert with the Church, punctuated by the 
horrendous 1899–1902 War of the Thousand Days, which claimed the lives of a 
hundred thousand people from a population of four million and saw the Panama 
Canal ceded to Washington. Theodore Roosevelt regarded the Colombian government as “homicidal corruptionists.” He insisted that the “Bogotá lot of jack 
rabbits” must not be permitted to “bar one of the future highways of civilisation” 
(quoted in McPherson 2016: 57). The period also saw chaotic currency movements. Conservatives and Liberals both issued paper money, and the peso’s 
value against the gold standard fell from 30 to 0.4 cents over the three years 
(Bulmer-Thomas 2003: 111 n. 96).
Conservative control fell into disrepute during the Depression, even though 
the latter’s economic effects were relatively mild. When the government slaughtered up to three thousand banana workers who were striking against U.S. capital 
on the Caribbean coast, this helped stimulate the Communist Party’s organization of the rural and urban poor. Violence between Conservatives and Liberals emerged again under Liberal hegemony from 1930, and a new bloc erupted, 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
24 The Per sistence of Violence
the Unión Nacional Izquierdista Revolucionaria (National Union for Leftist 
Revolution). Vicarious tensions arose during the Spanish Civil War, when Conservatives favored Francoist and Hitlerian demagoguery. Liberals removed the 
Church from its privileged position in favor of a nonsectarian and secular 
approach to daily life and public education. Meanwhile, an urban proletariat was 
forming, with the rise of textile manufacturing and government public-works 
programs designed to offset the loss of export revenue to the Global North. 
Through it all, extravagant claims were made for coffee as a panacea that could 
bring Colombians together pacifically in an idyll of decent work and just rewards 
(Bergquist 1991; Galeano 1997: 102; Bulmer-Thomas 2003: 230, 247; Schwaller 
2011: 195; Comisión Histórica 2015; Aranguren Romero 2017: 7–8; Guerrero and 
Fandiño-Losada 2017).
In 1946, the twenty-year Violencia began, as the dif­ferent interests of peasants, 
workers, politicians, soldiers, and fractions of capital were drawn into conflict. 
Conservatives used their electoral success to displace and persecute Liberals, 
who revolted. The radical presidential candidate Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, a brilliant 
radio orator and arguably the Colombian politician who has resonated most 
with the popular classes, was assassinated. Bogotá burned, though the main 
areas affected were in the countryside. General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla’s military 
coup in 1953, and associated anti-leftist rhetoric, bundled opposition groups 
together under a putatively socialist barrier. The Conservatives rolled back minimal agrarian reform in a welter of Cold War panic mixed with opportunism, 
slaughtering campesinos in the process and initially identifying Protestantism 
with the Soviet bloc. Colombia led the way when the Organization of American 
States expelled Cuba in 1962. By that time, Christian groups had combined in 
their opposition to the Left, though liberation theology was also emerging 
within Catholicism (Bergquist 1991; Roldán 2002; Freston 2004: 229; Brands 
2010: 51; Schwaller 2011: 197, 244; Deas 2015: 97; Guerrero and Fandiño-Losada 
2017; Celis González 2018: 36; Giraldo Durán and Álvarez de Castillo 2018). 
Meanwhile, Frantz Fanon fondly imagined Colombia’s campesinos interpreting 
national radio against the grain and taking revolutionary direction from Cuban 
and Chinese broadcasts instead (1965: 6–7).
The period from 1946 to 1966 cost three hundred thousand Colombians their 
lives, displaced two million others, and stole four hundred thousand plots of 
land from indigenous people. The Violencia ended when the junta installed a collaborative front, the two major parties agreed to take the presidency in turn, and 
Liberals purged progressives and minorities from their ranks. The accord suited 
an emergent international division of labor that set citizens of the periphery to 
work as extractors of primary goods and consumers of secondary ones, dragging 
peasants toward either regional production of cement, energy, and textiles, or 
industrialized food for export, notably bananas and coffee. As coal and petroleum grew in importance for the nation’s balance of trade, agriculture’s share 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 25
diminished, and campesinos’ economic prospects worsened. The demographic 
corollaries were intense: Colombia’s rural dwellers formed 70  percent of the 
population in 1960, less than 25 percent at the end of the century, and 20 percent 
in 2018. Food aid across the 1950s and ’60s had impoverished the rural sector by 
driving down the price of local commodities versus imported wheat, dispatching 
campesinos to the cities. Primary products accounted for 80 percent of exports in 
1980 and 66 percent in 2000, drawing level with manufacturing in their contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) (Orlando Melo 1998: 65; Ocampo and 
Tovar 2000: 240; Pécaut 2001; Dennis 2006; Comisión Histórica 2015; McMichael 
2017: 68; Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2019a: 13).
These changes birthed and developed today’s principal guerrilla and propelled the nation into collective traumas that have never truly ended. Political 
violence took a new turn from the 1960s due to insurgencies. In keeping with 
Cold War norms, Washington successfully urged violent repression on Bogotá. 
They jointly bombed resistant peasant groups and set up militias to persecute 
leftists. That set the precedent for paramilitares: Las Autodefensas Unidas de 
Colombia (AUC) (United Self-Defense Force of Colombia) (Dugas 2005; Hunt 
2009; Brands 2010: 60) and Las Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia (AGC) 
(United Self-Defense Gaitanistas of Colombia), their successors following a 
putative demilitarization in 2007. These forces have also done the dread work of 
corporations and ranchers (Hellinger 2015: 311). The AGC exploits the revered 
memory of Gaitán to reverse his politics, invoking populism while serving established interests.8
As in many cases across modern history, the relationship of such militias to 
the state is ambiguous (Carey et al. 2015), and there has been a tendency for the 
media to emphasize the horror of guerrilla atrocities by contrast with those committed by paramilitary forces (García Marrugo 2017) despite the latter’s intense 
brutality, from rituals of initiation to forms of torture and combat (Whitehouse 
and McQuinn 2013). And when a leftist political party ran for office in the 1980s, 
it was decimated by what the Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica (National 
Center for Historical Memory) now refers to as a genocide (2018a).
The Colombian government has sponsored three major studies into the 
causes and effects of this violence, in 1958, 1987, and 2007. They betray the lineaments of their time. The 1958 Comisión Nacional Investigadora de las Causas y 
Situaciones Presentes de la Violencia en el Territorio Nacional (National 
Research Commission into the Causes and Current State of Violence in the 
Nation) comprised men from politics, the military, literature, and Catholicism. 
It attempted to put a bipartisan end to bipartisan violence, referred to as “a widespread cancer” that could be overcome by cathartic confrontation and ameliorative social policies ( Jaramillo Marín 2015).
The 1987 Comisión de Estudios Sobre la Violencia (Study Commission 
into Violence) saw membership shift to public-university faculty from law, 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
26 The Per sistence of Violence
anthropology, sociology, and engineering, plus one retired officer; all were men. 
Because the agents of violence had become so varied and intense, it had to manage 
events that went beyond disagreements between elites that might be resolved technocratically. A discourse of bipartisanship neither described nor explained the 
numerous guerrilla and paramilitary groups plus narco gangsters generating what 
was now referred to as a “dirty war.” Whereas the 1958 group looked at policies, the 
1987 team focused on classification, generating taxonomies rather than programs, 
predicated on the belief that a renewed democracy would bring peace. A penny 
for your Habermas, since the evidence suggests that opening dialogue and 
interaction escalated the violence from 1985, when mayors were directly elected 
and a leftist political party made legitimate, and 1991, when a new Constitution 
increased decentralization (Steele and Schubiger 2018). Narcoterrorism emerged 
and the paramilitares and guerrilla alike killed and terrorized more and more 
people in struggles for these new political-economic resources, defying the 
assumptions underlying democratization. That said, the Commission marked a 
key moment in the advance of human-rights discourse in Colombia, which 
remains an intermittently potent tool of denunciation to this day ( Jaramillo 
Marín 2015).
Its successor, the Subcomisión de Memoria Histórica (Subcommission into 
Historical Memory) (2007–2012), comprised scholars and activists. It sought to 
monitor the supposed integration of armed groups into civil society and justice 
for their victims. Memory became a key concept, not merely as an aspect of 
knowledge but as a performative right in itself. It was to be used as proof of suffering and to shed light on sociocultural experiences of loss and grief. But the 
Subcommission’s work was overdetermined by an administration dedicated to 
violent destruction of the guerrilla and the assertion of nationwide state power 
(Shapiro et al. 2014; Jaramillo Marín 2015).
In summary, the various official inquiries, like academic work, tend to converge on certain topics as explanations of violence in Colombia, albeit with differences attributable to their governing conjunctures. But most agree that it 
results from elite desires and disputes, profound social inequality, disparities in 
living conditions between urban and rural life, the structure of political parties, 
failures of democratic will and participation, and narcotrafficking (Celis González 
2018: 28).
Drugs
Narco has become the prefix to much of contemporary Colombian life—narcotrafficking, narco-war, the narco-state, narco-culture (Lezcano 2018). Cocaine 
runs across the recent history of national violence, largely determined by the 
drug’s labor process, which has diversified over time with industrialization and 
as the gangs hired by cartels become actors in their own right. For some critics, 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 27
the nexus of cocaine and violence is a gruesome neoliberal project “in conjunction with both civil society (social capital) and the state, to forge both a model 
and a mythology of development whilst waging a phony war on drugs and drug 
dealers who have been incorporated into, and/or deployed by, elites in their genuine wars to dispossess rural citizens” (Fine and Durán Ortiz 2016: 14). The 
notion is that oligarchs, drug dealers, paramilitares, the United States, and Colombian national and departmental governments conspired to seize land, develop 
the corporate sector, and discredit the Left. That may be true, but the history is 
longer than it might suggest.
Andean coca leaves, which naturally abound in Bolivia and Perú, were immediately seized on by the conquistadores as a means of controlling and stimulating 
their indigenous silver-mine workers. Coca was inserted into world capitalism in 
the mid-nineteenth century, though its industrial alkaloid derivative cocaine was 
fairly insignificant globally until the 1970s, other than for anesthetic purposes 
and as a creative and sporting stimulant. Legal commodity chains operated from 
1860 to 1910, connecting Europe and the United States to Andean suppliers. Then 
criminalization took hold, and the trade internationalized as contraband through 
the Dutch, Japanese, and U.S. empires until World War II (Gootenberg 2006).
From the mid-1970s, Colombian gangsters imported coca paste from the 
Andes and chemical-processing elements from the Global North, using a complex supply chain of many small, informal businesses. The cartels set up cocaine 
factories in urban and then jungle laboratories, sending the product to Europe 
and the United States on passenger flights or light planes (Orlando Melo 1998: 
68). Coca leaf was successfully transplanted en masse to Colombia in the 1990s 
from Bolivia and Perú, which were gradually overrun by Yanqui interdiction. In 
1994, 20,000 hectares in Colombia were dedicated to coca. By 1996, the figure 
was 200,000. During initial production, indigenous and campesino rural dwellers 
were attacked to subdue or clear them out. Once cocaine was in play, intense violence proliferated across numerous sites (Bergman 2018: 5, 30, 51, 102):
• Distribution markets and routes
• Among traffickers
• With the state
• During retail on the street
• In related fields (football, oil, and minerals)
• Caused by addicts
By the twenty-first century, cocaine accounted for a quarter of the country’s 
exports and three percent of its GDP (Bulmer-Thomas 2003: 9). Coca cultivated 
in Colombia virtually halved between 2000 and 2013; but that was followed by 
massive increases as a consequence of failed compensation schemes for farmers, 
new cartel tactics, and diminished interdiction. The amount grew by a third from 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
28 The Per sistence of Violence
2015 to 2016, to almost nine hundred tonnes. Two-thirds of the globe’s hectares 
dedicated to coca (170,000) are in Colombia, the majority in the Pacific and central zones. Thousands of laboratories convert the raw material (United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime 2018a: 8, 29; 2018b: 11). There are gun battles in 
Bogotá and Medellín between rival gangs and the police, threatening the relative 
calm in big cities as assault weaponry proliferates via FARC cast-offs and Venezuelan military sales. Meanwhile, cartels compete for domestic as well as international demand (Ávila 2019).
As a consequence of cocaine, what had been largely political struggles 
branched out and deepened in both their violence and their overall impact. The 
blend of organized, non-ideological, criminal violence and organized, ideological, militia/guerrilla/state violence is unprecedented in Latin America since 
independence. New fractions of capital have become involved via the financial 
sector’s invention of monetary instruments to launder plunder (Alvarado 2012; 
Kacowicz and Mares 2016: 16; Aranguren Romero 2017: 9–11; Guerrero and 
Fandiño-Losada 2017; Giraldo Durán and Álvarez de Castillo 2018).
As a consequence, whereas violent crime and systematic conflict are generally quite separate, that is not the case in Colombia. During the 1980s, the cocaine 
trade stimulated the rise of powerful, ruthless cartels, notably in Cali and Medellín. They ruled as alternative governments, vying with each other and the state 
for control and authority: the informal economy rearing up to challenge all comers and seize the mythology of populism. The power of the narcos derived from 
many factors (Atehortúa Cruz and Rojas Rivera 2008; Castells 2010: 205):
• Support for the trade in drugs by the U.S. government during the Vietnam 
War as a means of funding proxy local actors, who quickly perceived potentially powerful market forces at play among the U.S. military and fueled a 
demand that was soon repatriated
• The counterculture’s fantasy of alternative consciousness
• Favorable climatic and agricultural conditions
• Peace Corps veterans’ taste for “Santa Marta Gold” mariguana
• Capacity, based on generations of coca production
• Proximity to U.S. ports
• Smuggling skills garnered from transporting contraband over generations of 
piracy and catering to legal addicts (of tobacco)
• The ease of transporting large amounts of powder by contrast with weeds
• Interest from U.S. mafiosi
• Lack of interdiction, facilitated by police who were for sale
Since the Cold War, the conflict has transformed from a desire for land 
redistribution to human exploitation via narcotics and sequestration, as inspiration for the guerrilla switched from Marxism-Leninism to wealthy nasal passages 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 29
(Moser and McIlwaine 2000: viii, 7). Today, drug traffickers and rebel groups of 
all kinds are often one and the same—by turns rivals and collaborators in a trail 
of cocaine that is harvested and manufactured in Colombia then moves through 
Ecuador, bordering the Pacific en route to the United States. This fragmentation 
of gangsters leads to massive violence between rival groups, as yesterday’s cartel 
enforcers become tomorrow’s new cartel (Bergman 2018). Gangs and guerrillas, 
inhumanness and ideology, kidnapping and cocaine overlap in an “age of violence entrepreneurs” (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2016: 27, 2009: 39).
New and transformed occupations and formations proliferate and transmogrify: assassins, militia, gangs, mafia, and corrupt administrations, churches, football clubs, universities, press, politics, police, the FARC, the Ejército Popular de 
Liberación (EPL—Popular Liberation Army—Maoist then Marxist-Leninist), 
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN—Army of National Liberation—a 
Guevarist group originating among urban students), and its dissidents, who 
formed the Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo (ERP—People’s Revolutionary 
Army) (Pécaut 2001; Celis González 2018; Oquendo 2019).
“There are no ‘good guys’” (Meltzer and Rojas 2005: 1). As a consequence, 
the association of Colombia with the drug has become magnetic for outsiders. 
To give just one instance, John Oliver’s liberal HBO satire Last Week Tonight
(2014–) dedicated a 2018 episode to Venezuela’s political economy, in a way that 
was remarkably balanced for bourgeois Yanqui (U.S.) television. But almost 
inevitably, in order to provide some context to that nation’s level of corruption, 
Oliver compared it to Colombia, “a country where the only campaign finance 
law is ‘please report all bribes consisting of more than 10 kilos of cocaine.’”9
Beyond ideology and social structure, cocaine has transmogrified the country. It represents the collision of rural resources and poverty, urban mafia and 
commerce, corrupt and fragmented guerrilla, and international demand for distraction and addiction (Hobsbawm 1995: 366). The governmental context for all 
this is a state that is by turns overly present (as a threat) and overly absent (as a 
source of protection).
The State
The state can be forcefully present in Colombia through the police, the military, 
and proxy AUC/AGC paramilitares. As already noted, the militarization of 
Colombian society was undertaken at the partial expense and behest of the 
United States, which preferred state-sponsored violence to development aid as a 
route to control cocaine traffic and political insurgency (Tokatlian 1997; Rosen 
and Kassab 2019: 61). The bilateral “Plan Colombia” shifted the battleground 
states for cocaine export elsewhere and led to a vast array of extrajudicial killings 
and other crimes: former members of the AUC/affiliates of the AGC now harass 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
30 The Per sistence of Violence
and kill indigenous, peasant, and Afro-Colombian activists, while others have 
been extradited to the United States for drug trials to avoid implicating establishment co-conspirators. The record shows that the paramilitares are emboldened 
to commit more and more killings with increased “military assistance,” as it is 
coyly known. They have a particular taste for assassination during elections 
(Dube and Naidu 2014).
At a geopolitical level, Colombia is celebrated by DC as a successful junior 
partner in defeating the guerrilla. The  U.S. and Colombian militaries position 
themselves as joint masters of drug interdiction, protecting their budgets and 
numbers by offering such services around the globe (Lindsay-Poland and Tickner 2016; Sontag 2016). This is known as “risk-transfer militarism” (Smith et al. 
2014). It serves as a model for U.S. intervention in conflict from a distance: 
select, train, and arm foreign militias, police, and armies, tell them whom to 
kill—then sell them materiel that had once been distributed as aid (LindsayPoland 2018: 7–8, 11).
U.S. nationalists regard Colombia “as perhaps the U.S. military’s greatest 
human rights success story in Latin America” (Laurienti 2007: 62). Amateurhour foreign-policy experts, informed by helicopter visits rather than scholarly 
or practical knowledge, declared a “Colombian miracle” a decade ago (Boot and 
Bennet 2009). John Kerry’s 2013 confirmation hearing as secretary of state featured astonishing claims to this effect, capable of coming only from someone 
ignorant of the language, life, geography, history, and contemporaneity of the 
nation. He called Colombia “[o]ne of the great stories of Latin America,” praising ultra-rightist ex-president, rentier-class propagandist, and paramilitary patron 
and pardoner Álvaro Uribe Vélez for “rescuing that nation.” Kerry euphemized 
these changes as a tribute to DC’s “citizen security partnership” (“Nomination” 
2013: 19, 80). For their part, coin-operated liberal think tanks such as the Brookings Institution speak of the Plan as offering “much to celebrate”; it may be “too 
soon for America to declare victory and forget about Colombia,” but Uribe’s 
“personality and energy” are prized along with his ability to develop tighter links 
between the military and citizenry (O’Hanlon and Petraeus 2013). This is pomposity as per the discourse of these bodies during the Cold War, an arrogance 
that Hannah Arendt sought to puncture (1970: 14–16) but which has never been 
deflated. In the similarly bizarre world of orthodox international-relations scholarship, Plan Colombia is understood as the successful disciplining of an errant 
child: “a combination of rewards, punishments, and capacity improvements” 
(Vaughn 2019: 80).
A breathtaking blend of solipsism and ignorance forms the substructure of 
such great-game international strategizing. In that world, the putative task of foreign policy is to stabilize conflict to the satisfaction of the leading powers, acting 
in the name of principle and commitment but favoring the satisfaction of one’s 
own interests in restricting the spread of unrest. That is how Colombia appears 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 31
in the literature of U.S. policy (Morgenthau 1969: 26–27). It has nothing to do 
with proletarian and peasant views, nothing to do with languages beyond 
English, nothing to do with material life, nothing to do with the cultures being 
tossed about like so many suddenly worthless cards in a hand. The continuity is 
obvious: the desire of Western powers to create a form of stability by selecting, 
encouraging, and securing comprador elites. This doctrine is a regrettable and 
seemingly unstoppable legacy from imperial order and international-relations 
discourse.
The Colombian corollary is that successive administrations in Bogotá picked 
up on Washington’s post 9/11 fetishes and redefined the FARC and others as terrorists, thereby expanding U.S. aid by enveloping the conflict in the putative 
“war on terror” (Rosen and Bagley 2015). Uribe colluded with the worst of the 
worst. Hundreds of politicians had “relationships” with the paramilitary and cartel worlds (Romero 2007; Acemoglu et al. 2013; Fine and Durán Ortiz 2016).
More generally, Colombia is a “paradoxical marriage of a state of continuous 
violence with the hallmarks of democratic civilization” (Rojas 2002: xxii), “an 
extreme example of the contemporary unpicking of the so-called Westphalian 
model of territorial states that monopolize violent resources” (Keane 2004: 179). 
This is true in terms of both the impunity of violent actors and the failure to 
deliver basic social services to citizens. But there is a national government, which 
has been almost exclusively democratic in form, unlike many of its neighbors 
(Karl 2017: 1) (albeit routinely put into a state of exception to permit repression 
[Aranguren Romero 2017: 12]). It is putatively held to account by an independent press. International obligations are entered into, whether bilaterally with 
the U.S. military, or multilaterally, in the form of commitments to neoliberal economic restructuring. In terms of the chapters to come, there is intense nationalism, on display in football fandom. Hugely popular televisual dramatizations 
invoke glamorous and easy (albeit illicit) lives. And Bogotá’s policies stimulate 
and govern tourism and claim to protect the environment.
With a large, educated middle class and significant resources suitable for secondary accumulation, Colombia is supposedly poised to open its newly secure, 
bountiful territory to increased foreign investment, extraction, construction, 
and natural and human exploitation. Hence the tourism slogan adopted by the 
government in 2012, “La Respuesta es Colombia” (The Answer Is Colombia), 
displacing the idea of the nation as a problem with the conceit that it is instead a 
solution—rebranding the country as enduringly appealing and now safe. Once 
the drug cartels and terrorist guerrilla were dispensed with, it was said, Colombia 
would enter a new golden age. This would counter such stereotypes as being the 
“Tibet Suramericano” (the Tibet of South America) in the 1980s and a narcodemocracia (narcodemocracy) in the 1990s. Instead, the nation seeks to define itself 
as “una estrella que brilla” (a shining star) and the new “tigre de Latinoamérica” 
(Latin American tiger), troping the booming Southeast Asian economies of the 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
32 The Per sistence of Violence
1980s. Colombia stands ready and able to help meet the world’s economic 
needs—and focuses, in dutifully neoliberal fashion, on labor-market training 
rather than guaranteed income, agrarian reform, or job creation (Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2019b: 392), obediently liberalizing, deregulating, and privatizing to satisfy its northern masters (Rodrik 
2007: 20).
Here is the current economic reality. By the end of 2018, Colombia’s (formal 
sector) GDP measured by purchasing-power parity stood at well over US$730 
billion. Petroleum, petrochemicals, coal, and coffee were its major exports, principally to the United States, China, and Panamá (Economist Intelligence Unit 
2019). Yet despite these numbers, a lengthy period of significant economic 
growth, and virtually zero inflation, the country is as unequal as when the conflict began. Two decades of neoliberal policies have slowed growth, increased 
unemployment in the formal sector—and brought double-digit percentage job 
growth ‘thanks’ to cocaine (Hellinger 2015: 326).
The supposed national interest serves a small ruling elite of ranchers, politicians, moguls, and narcotraficantes, buttressed by state violence (Hunt 2009; 
Aranguren Romero 2017: 14). Oxfam estimates that “over 67 percent of productive land is concentrated in 0.4 percent of agricultural landholdings” (2016: 5–6) 
and Thomas Piketty and the World Top Incomes Database list Colombia’s elite 
receiving a fifth of all national income between 1990 and 2010—more than is the 
case in the United States (2014: 327).
Waves of fixed capital formation investment and contraction cycling with 
international demand for oil and related commodities have done little for the 
popular classes, while public works have generally been undertaken to enable 
capital or recover from environmental disasters (Bulmer-Thomas 2003: 8, 10, 
387; Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2018: 498–
499, 505). The tax system minimizes corporate contributions to government revenue and maximizes indirect taxes. Corporate taxes and surcharges plunged 
from 40  percent in 2017 to 33  percent in 2019. Indirect taxation soared to 
19 percent, the highest rate ever (Economist Intelligence Unit 2019; International 
Monetary Fund 2019), thereby aiding the wealthy at the expense of the poor. The 
economy had already slowed down due to levies on consumption, while unemployment was just below ten percent (United Nations Economic Commission 
for Latin America and the Caribbean 2018).
Almost half the population is stuck in the informal sector. A third lived below 
the poverty line in 1980; half did so twenty years later. Lower-income people 
improved their income relative to the wealthier in 2017, but the tenth of Colombians living in extreme poverty was double the proportion of Brazilians and 
many times the percentages of Chileans and Argentines (Hellinger 2015: 320; 
Organización para la Cooperación y el Desarrollo Económico 2015: 8; Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2019b: 110, 234).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 33
Nor is there a national popular identifiable with the needs and hopes of the 
majority. Rather, it is animated by entitled classes, many of whose forebears 
gained authority and wealth from colonial dispossession and enslavement. This 
has accentuated regional and other differences. No wonder so many people 
shrugged their shoulders when they were promised that the peace would see a 
true exchange of armaments in favor of votes: two-thirds of the electorate did 
not participate in the 2016 plebiscite to endorse the accord with the FARC 
(Magallón 2016).
The lack of trust in major institutions has spread to religion: Catholic hegemony has come under challenge. About 60 percent of the population are practicing Christians, while over a third say they embrace God but do not attend 
church. Seventy percent are Catholic. Atheism and agnosticism are marginal, 
and just a quarter of people adhere to the theory of evolution. But the period 
since the 1990s has seen a wave of Pentecostalism in both urban and rural Colombia, especially among women and young people, to the point where around a 
sixth of the population identify as evangelical, three-quarters of whom were 
raised Catholic (Beltrán 2012; Pew Research Center 2014: 5).
There are profound contradictions at play here: a country with one of the 
longest-running conflicts in history is technically a stable democracy. Cocaine 
and mining are a toxic mixture for defenders of indigenous and peasant lands, 
who face execution by means up to and including decapitation, deeds undertaken with impunity as the paramilitary assert authority over terrain in ways 
reminiscent of the 1990s. The number of indigenous, human-rights, and environmental activists murdered has multiplied massively since the peace accord was 
endorsed, while corporate geologists and others involved in gold exploration 
have been killed or kidnapped by groups seeking hegemony over illegal mining 
and corruption and killing—directed by rivalrous multinationals (Dennis 2006; 
Sheinin 2015; Pino Uribe 2017; Chaparro and Yagoub 2018; Goldberg 2018; McEvoy 2018; Rueda De la Hoz 2018; Saavedra 2018; Sánchez-Garzoli 2018; Peláez 
Sierra 2019).
The cosmic failure of the Colombian state and oligarchy to produce a substantive and inclusive national popular has seen violence fill that gap, as the 
seeming essence of the nation and its people. Elsewhere, such traumas have produced a solemn public and elite determination to turn tragedy into myth in the 
name of unity. Not in Colombia. Instead, the violence has taken numerous grotesquely targeted forms.
Gender and Race
Violence against women is more common in Latin America than in the rest of the 
world, as are female deaths from firearms (Small Arms Survey 2016). Colombia’s 
many extreme forms of gendered violence feature rape, disfigurement, and 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
34 The Per sistence of Violence
femicide (Moloney 2015; Huertas and Jiménez 2016). The Instituto Colombiano de 
Medicina Legal reported 21,115 cases of sexual violence in 2014, with 85.05 percent 
of victims being women (2015). As in many countries, over 90 percent of homicide victims are men, but unlike women, generally not as a consequence of violence undertaken at home, or with a sexual element. Women are frequently 
killed by people they know—attacked by family members rather than strangers 
(De la Hoz Bohórquez and Romero Quevedo 2016). A full 39 percent of Colombian women report violent treatment from male partners, and a spate of acid 
attacks by men on women over the last five years has affected thousands (Guerrero 2013; “Alarma y repudio” 2014; Gaviria Castellanos et  al. 2015; “Wonder 
Women” 2015). Public-health experts argue that a failure to consider historical 
patterns of oppression downplays the statistical significance of such violence 
(Bello-Urrego 2013).
All sides in the conflict have engaged in sexual torture, with women and sexual minorities targeted for humiliation as part of a violent clearance aimed at sex 
workers, street retailers, and other people on the margins of power, who are 
assaulted by armed groups when in public space (Oxfam 2009; Suárez-Pinzón 
2015; Serrano-Amaya 2018). Colombia Diversa, a human-rights organization 
dedicated to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex issues, estimates 
that over a thousand queer people were killed between 1993 and 2017. Many 
victims are unidentified, and perpetrators remain free.10 Statutory rape is routine practice for the guerrilla and paramilitares alike (Human Rights Watch 
2019).
Colombian women played key roles in the struggle for independence and 
have formed social movements to define and defend their rights and publicize 
their experiences over the past two centuries (Villarreal Méndez 1994; Solano 
2003; Lamus 2008; Puello Sarabia 2017: 84–85; León Soler 2019). But state policies designed to alleviate systematic gender discrimination and inequality have 
been inconsistently applied and largely ineffective (Gómez Cano et  al. 2015). 
And there has been a wave of U.S.-inspired evangelical opposition to women’s 
and queer rights, culminating in the defeat of the peace plebiscite: Pentecostals 
are distinguished by their heterosexist and patriarchal politicization, and the 
process had dared to guarantee marriage equality and other citizenship norms. 
These evangelicals closely follow leaders’ instructions, which promise health and 
prosperity as quae pro quibus.11 Those hegemonic intellectuals also engineer 
events understood as “divine healing,” which three quarters of their flock say 
they have witnessed. Half deem themselves to have been present at exorcisms 
and a quarter to have spoken in tongues (Beltrán 2012; Pew Research Center 
2014: 15, 65–66; Marcos 2016). The Pentecostals seem less concerned that a third 
of women in their twenties are subject to child marriage than with their exercise 
of sexual and reproductive rights (UN Women n.d.).
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 35
Women’s health and participation in the workforce, education, and politics 
saw Colombia ranked 42nd  of 145 countries in 2015, descending from the 
22nd spot it attained in 2006 (World Economic Forum 2015). The Human Development Report’s index of gender inequality reveals that Colombian women 
encounter serious difficulties in securing positions of public leadership (Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo 2015). More than four out of 
five seats in the congress are held by men (Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean 2019a: 27). A decade ago, the United Nations noted 
a stark gendered difference in the unemployment rate: 11.5 percent for women as 
opposed to 6.9 percent for men (2010). That disparity continues today (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2019a: 17). Women are 
likely to be stuck in the informal sector and secondary labor markets, especially 
if they are indigenous or black; and those groups have disproportionately high 
levels of maternal mortality (Organización para la Cooperación y el Desarrollo 
Económico 2015: 34; Cabezas Cortés 2016; Perazzi and Merli 2017; Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2019b: 472).
Ethnicity/race are defined differently from the norms of the Global North. 
The state counts much of the population as mixed race—a single group that 
would be disaggregated as indigenous, black, Asian, and so on in western Europe 
and its settler colonies. The latest census (2005) considers 37 percent of Colombians to be white and 49 percent mestiz@ (mixed)—a distinction that is itself 
not always clear (Hudson 2010: 10). It identifies three non-mestiz@ minorities: 
87 national indigenous groups, comprising 1.4 million people who live communally and use their original languages (3.4 percent of the overall population); 4.3 
million Afro-Colombian descendants of slaves (10.6 percent); and 5,000 Gitano 
(Roma) (0.01 percent) (Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística 
2007: 33).
The majority is therefore defined as largely unified in racial terms, despite 
being a blend of indigenous, Afro-Colombian, Asian, European, Sephardic, and 
Arabic heritage. The prevailing ideology of mestizaje assumes a norm in which 
Colombians form a mosaic of racial intermarriage and respect. As the popular 
saying goes, “Aquí en Colombia somos muy mezclados” (Here in Colombia we 
are very mixed) (quoted in Restrepo et al. 2014). Recent scientific, political, and 
commercial investments in genomics seek to confirm Colombia’s hegemonic 
cultural landscape. Results are pored over to reveal that most people have indigenous heritage—downplaying Africanism—and that the dominant fons et origo
was sexual liaisons between conquistadores (conquerors) and indigenas (Wade 
2013).
Here’s the real deal: descendants of the original inhabitants who survived 
colonization and capitalism mostly occupy peripheral areas, through isolation or 
exile (Stavenhagen 2002). Indigenous and black minorities suffer massive 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
36 The Per sistence of Violence
inequality, and whites and mestiz@s dominate political, economic, cultural, and 
social life (Cabezas-Cortés 2016; Perazzi and Merli 2017. Black lives are cheapened by state actors and others—not just in colonial history or contemporary 
tourism, but through violence that targets them from all sides (Vergara-Figueroa 
2018).
This social structure follows a familiar history throughout the region—an elite 
defining itself against indigenous and black peoples while relying on slave labor, 
forcibly dispossessing native peoples, and raping and marrying indigenous women. 
South American movements for independence from Spain and Portugal were 
not about distancing oneself from Europe and integrating with original owners. 
The revolutionaries favored Westphalian nation-building, U.S. political republicanism, British economic liberalism, Prussian militarism, and social Darwinism.
In sum, Colombia’s problems arose before it did, with the horror of empire 
and slavery. They concatenated with the formation of a powerful oligarchy, 
which continues to this day: obsessed with the rule of law, dependent for its origins on stolen lands worked by slaves, and for its continuation on clientelism and 
control of the formal economy and politics. That has left little opportunity for a 
vast number of poor people other than in the informal sector, where they frequently operate through criminal, violent means, sometimes with and sometimes without ideological alibis.
That macrohistorical account gains human contour in the remarkable work of 
Miguel Ángel Beltrán Villegas (2018). Incarcerated for many years as an alleged 
FARC ideologist, Beltrán Villegas spent his time interviewing fellow-prisoners 
from across the spectrum—guerrilleros, paramilitares, soldiers, and their visitors. 
The result is a profound work of participant observation that finds much in common among fellow cellmates: they combined a lamentation for the pain they had 
caused with a disgust for the corrupt oligarchies running corporate and state life.
Columbia and the Popular
Iván Duque Márquez, an invention/political creature of Uribe, was elected 
Colombian president in 2018, having spent many years in the Inter-American 
Development Bank’s Division of Culture, Creativity and Solidarity. During his 
time in DC, he became a fervent disciple of an English conceptual export to the 
world, the fantasy of a creative economy—a postindustrial, post-polluting world. 
Duque is coauthor of the Bank’s book, Orange Economy: An Infinite Opportunity
(Buitrago Restrepo and Duque Márquez 2013). The choice of the word “orange” 
derives from pharaonic tombs, but for me, it invokes Benjamin’s distaste for the 
nation’s 1930s stamps: “the postal parvenus . . . large, badly perforated, garish formats” (2016: 82).
I remember, with a stiff stomach, a congress in Lima when Felipe Buitrago 
Restrepo, Duque’s coauthor, presented their extravagant promises, obediently 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 37
copied from the British Council: a secular religion that offered transcendence 
in the here and now through a world blessed for workers, consumers, and residents, where waste would be code rather than carbon. Other participants tried 
to foment discussion on the subject, but it was almost impossible. We were in 
the presence of a true believer and an audience keen to see itself transferred 
from welfare recipients to economic agents. Six years on and his reward was to 
be Duque’s Viceministro de Creatividad y Economía Naranja (Deputy Minister 
of Creativity and the Orange Economy), responding to what Buitrago describes 
as the challenge to “hacer digerible, sexy y provocativa a la economía naranja” 
(make the orange economy digestible, sexy, and provocative) (quoted in S. 
Rincón 2019).
The latest fetish among the sacerdotes of creativity is the putative “collaborative economy.” A cybertarian fantasy of pre-capitalist bartering is brought to bear 
on supposed new liberties occasioned by digital communications and economic 
deregulation, but with monetary incentives for brokers (think of lonely-hearts 
club Internet dating, bed and breakfast services that don’t pay taxes, or underregulated door-to-door driving services).
Unsurprisingly, Duque’s administration emphasizes the financial value of the 
sector:
La economía naranja está en camino de convertirse en uno de los principales 
motores económicos de Colombia: el mundo de la iniciativa empresarial, la tecnología y las industrias creativas ya representa casi el 3% del PIB del país latinoamericano, lo que representa tres veces la contribución del café y casi 1,5 veces el 
aporte de la minería. Colombia quiere posicionarse como símbolo naranja, color 
de la cultura y creatividad.
“Impulsar la economía naranja es una de las prioridades del gobierno. En ProColombia, hemos identificado grandes oportunidades de ventas en el desarrollo de 
software, películas, televisión, animación y videojuegos. Estos son sectores que 
han crecido más de un 30% en exportaciones,” explica Flavia Santoro, presidenta 
de ProColombia, la entidad del Gobierno de Colombia que promueve las inversiones, las exportaciones, el turismo y la marca país en el exterior. “Colombia se 
está convirtiendo en un lugar ideal para filmar industrias como Hollywood. 
Antonio Banderas, Tom Cruise, Will Smith o Mark Wahlberg son algunos de los 
actores de talla internacional que en los últimos años han filmado películas en 
territorio colombiano.”
(The orange economy is on the way to becoming one of Colombia’s principal 
economic engines: the world of entrepreneurship, technology and the creative 
industries already represents almost 3% of the GDP of the Latin American country, which represents three times the contribution of coffee and almost 1.5 times 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
38 The Per sistence of Violence
the contribution of mining. Colombia wants to position itself as an orange symbol, the color of culture and creativity.)
(“Promoting the orange economy is one of the government’s priorities. At ProColombia, we have identified great sales opportunities in the development of 
software, movies, television, animation and videogames. These sectors have 
grown more than 30% in exports,” explains Flavia Santoro, president of ProColombia, the Colombian Government body that promotes investment, exports, 
tourism and the country brand abroad. “Colombia is becoming an ideal place for 
film industries like Hollywood. Antonio Banderas, Tom Cruise, Will Smith and 
Mark Wahlberg are some of the actors of international stature who in recent years 
have made movies in Colombian territory.”) (“Orange Economy” 2018)
Again, there is a space between governmental rhetoric and reality. The United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s comparison of Colombia’s 
cultural import-export performance in 2003 and 2012 discloses a serious and 
growing trade imbalance in the culture industries, with the U. S. an increasingly 
powerful influence (2015: 36–37). The nation’s own accounts indicate that the 
area’s contribution to GDP in a period of strong overall economic growth 
(between 2001 and 2007) went from 1.6 percent to 1.8 percent, though that represented a doubling in value, from under three and a half billion pesos to over eight 
and a half billion (Oxford Economics 2014).
Colombia has issued the world’s first bonds to develop cultural infrastructure, to the value of four billion pesos (“Colocados” 2018). Duque spoke at the 
auction, indicating that he wanted his invented “Orange Economy” to contribute a tenth of the nation’s GDP, akin to the contribution from manufacturing. 
Ironically, the model was Holland—very orange. Given that proletarian labor 
costs are higher than in many Asian economies, Duque sees Colombia’s urbanism and digital connectivity as key competitive advantages—and supposed 
safety from the violence that disrupts the extractive sector in remote areas (Sonneland 2018). The generous state underwrites/materializes Duque and Buitrago’s desiderata via fiscal, monetary, and taxation incentives designed to encourage 
the NICL by promising foreign investors that they will pay no income tax for 
seven years and receive a 19% break on indirect taxes for exported texts. The 
government allocated half a billion dollars towards this extravaganza for 2019, 
thanks to the formation of Duque’s very own Consejo Nacional de Economía 
Naranja (National Orange Economy Council) (S. Rincón 2019; “Consejo 
Nacional” 2019).
So Colombian popular culture is reborn as a set of creative industries; subordinating inalienable heritage, craft production, and the refusal of racism, sexism, 
and nationalism to avaricious capital. It seeks to make things in similar ways to 
the manufacture of an automobile or artificial knee, producing objects for con-
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 39
sumption in the so-called magical operation of supply and demand. Consider 
the New Cinema and Location Colombia laws. Taking advantage of the growing 
number of technical and university degrees that school the willing and worthy in 
film and television, Location Colombia was enacted to lure international productions. It copied similar actions elsewhere: cash rebates and tax returns to foreign companies (AKA Hollywood) willing to relocate production. The lure 
included a new El Dorado of cheap labor, beautiful scenery, and industrious 
servitude—the classic NICL. It is creating primary (international) versus secondary (local) audiovisual labor markets: international productions increase the 
quality of life for audiovisual workers in an environment that is out of reach for 
those employed in Colombian screen drama. For example, Dynamo, a Colombian production company that has profited from the new legislation, has done 
little to support local talent or national films (Rocha 2018: 363). Despite the 
increasing numbers of Colombian films and audiences for them, the local industry remains a site of precarious work and difficult working conditions (Arias 
et al. 2018). And runaway productions promote the exploitation of local workers 
by local producers, since foreign producers are required to hire Colombian firms, 
which profit most when expanding their overheads and reducing local costs, 
generating those primary versus secondary labor markets that separate foreign 
from domestic crews (Uribe-Jongbloed and Corredor-Aristizábal 2020).
Like the orange economy in general, the benefits are unevenly distributed, 
because they require technology and English. Twenty million Colombians do 
not have access to the Internet and well under a fifth of the workforce is bilingual 
(S. Rincón 2019). At the high end financially, this means that Colombian settings 
and actors are used to represent Venezuela in the second season of Amazon’s Jack 
Ryan (2019), its highest-rating series ever, with virtually no one aware of the part 
played by the NICL. In case anyone imagined that Bogotá standing in for Caracas was dubious, lead actor John Krasinski was on hand to reassure viewers that 
filming in Colombia was “genuinely dangerous” (quoted in Griffiths 2019). Conversely, Colombia becomes the diegetic source of a rampaging imperialism in 
season five of The Last Ship (TNT, 2018)—shot in California (Richford 2018; 
Thorne 2019; Debnath 2018)—to match its lawless, leftist reputation.
Despite this oleaginous political economy, other cultural practices—heritage, 
craft, the avant garde, contemporary dance, and activism—are not mere crumbs 
scraped from the chopping board of a ‘creative’ corporate bakery.
Consider the century-long career of José Eustasio Rivera’s 1924 modernist 
classic of the jungle novel, La Vorágine (The Vortex) (1985). It details the elopement of a young couple from Bogotá during the 1879–1912 rubber boom. They 
make their way through violent gangs and rough terrain, all the while observing 
the hell of daily life for enslaved indigenous plantation workers. The vortex of the 
Amazon ultimately claims the protagonists: they can neither find a way out, nor 
be found by others.
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
40 The Per sistence of Violence
The story borrows from an array of influences:
• A Greco-Roman tragedy of an inferno claiming star-crossed lovers
• The avant garde
• The fearful encounter of mestizaje with the environment
• The horror of forced labor
• The destructiveness of industrial lust for natural resources
La Vorágine is regularly reimagined in commercial screen forms via Colombian 
film and TV adaptations—part of a constantly developing national tradition of 
rap music, plays, poetry, and drama that places the horror of violence and the 
hope for peace at its core. Again and again, the theme is the seeming inevitability 
of conflict, the desire to end it, and links between corporatized crime, ideological violence, the state, and mainstream civil society (Oslender 2008). The 
nation’s novelists and short-story writers in particular frequently use first-person 
narration, offering horrified wonderment at their survival, or feature protagonists making their way across the country who are bewildered by its “ubiquitous 
tragedy” (Chaparro Valderrama 2007: xviii).
This literary fascination is not always critical or progressive; the popular is 
also crucial to gendered violence. So memoirs by Colombian assassins articulate 
masculinity to violence through pleasure—a hedonistic cathexis onto motorbikes, guns, and clothes as signs of virility obtained through death (Franco 
2001). Consider the textualization of Jhon Jairo Velásquez, a key assassin for the 
Medellín cocaine cartel in the 1980s. He was personally responsible for killing 
hundreds of people, and managed the assassination of thousands more. Jairo 
Velásquez became known as Popeye due to a supposed resemblance to the cartoon character—a typical sicario (assassin) appropriation of popular culture to 
leaven and lighten their image (Uribe 2018). Following his release from prison in 
2014, Popeye’s YouTube channel exploded in popularity, gaining well over a million subscribers.12 He remade himself under the soubriquet “Popeye Rependido” (Repentant Popeye) and claimed redemption through apology, even as he 
started his videos with bullet holes and gunfire, proudly admitted to mass murders, and interpellated his ultra-right followers as political confrères (compatriots) 
(Mele and Garcia 2016; Anderson 2018). Netflix merrily parlayed a Colombian 
adaptation of his memoir, Sobreviviendo a Escobar (Surviving Escobar) (2017) 
and a reactionary Spanish province hired him to promote its setting and cuisine.13 Rolling Stone and the New Yorker profiled him (Glade 2017; “Popeye” 2018) 
and Russia Today released a bizarre documentary, Escobar’s Hitman (2017), 
which trailed Popeye around Medellín as he encountered victims and their families and was hailed on the streets by the popular classes.14 Throughout, the carefully curated image is of a paradoxically dependent man’s man, indebted to 
hegemonic masculinity, craving the approval of his chosen chief, and eschewing 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 41
introspective males and ‘scheming’ women (Bialowas Pobutsky 2013). In 2018, 
he was back in the joint, accused of extortion, intimidation, and leading a group 
of bagmen for the mob. The following year, he was charged with human-rights 
violations for his part in the 1986 murder of the prominent newspaper editor, 
Guillermo Cano Isaza (Higuera 2019).
To understand how vanguardist prose and a mass murderer can be so influential, we must travel beyond material macrohistory and enter the seemingly 
ephemeral world of popular culture. Gabo’s thoughts about the binary contradictions of Colombian subjectivity apply tellingly to both a modernist classic’s 
intertexts and remakes, where an intolerable, inevitable fate is part of the ecstasy 
of love, development ruins the environment, and labor is forced and painful—
and to a crude, cruel, coarse assassin who draws on so-called social media for 
self-aggrandizement, incitement—and renewed criminal organization.
La Vorágine instantiates and criticizes hegemonic forms of racial, ecological, 
and gender power in a way that presages both the magical realism of Gabo and 
his list of binaries: paradoxes of gentle and harsh people and places, where comfort and ease are cheek by jowl with pain and suffering for humans and the natural world. Those paradoxes are homologous with the novel’s industrial history, 
which crosses ancient European myth-making, modernist literature, and popular cinema and television. For his part, Popeye’s brazenly murderous narcissism 
appeals to young men, publishers, and Hollywood alike in its quasi-humorous 
deadly outrage at the world—and right-wing bling.
Comprehending the life of these commodified cultural signs is part of understanding Colombia’s persistence of violence, especially now that there is such 
adoration of culture’s commercial potential via the putative orange economy.
The Book You Hold in Your Hands
I write as someone who has been heavily influenced by Latin American social 
science and humanities and their equivalents in the United States and Europe. 
Colombian communication studies, which is of particular pertinence to me, is 
divided into “four fields” (not unlike U.S. anthropology). They include journalism, quantitative method, organizational communication, and semiotics, derived 
from the intersection of administrative (U.S.) and critical (Latin American) paradigms (Martín-Barbero 2006; Barranquero Carretero et al. 2017). But unlike in 
the Global North, Colombian faculty and students frequently function across 
these domains, doing policy-oriented and quantoid work as well as textual analysis and political economy. The Persistence of Violence follows that lead in its methodological mix.
The book draws on the accounts and contradictions adumbrated in this introduction to contextualize detailed investigations of key sites in Colombian popular culture that express violence and its counters. I blend political economy, 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
42 The Per sistence of Violence
ethnography, and content and textual analysis, mixing philosophical, scientific, 
and social-scientific approaches through the filter of Latin American studies. 
Each chapter commences with an account in theoretical and research terms of the 
general phenomenon of popular culture that follows, in its Colombian context.
Chapter 1, on sports, focuses on the national pastime, association football. It 
looks at the hypermasculinity embodied by many fans and its imbrication with 
narcotrafficking, the media, and symbolic ties to militarism. The chapter draws 
on football’s history, its corruption and violence, and a close reading of the 
game’s recent use by television networks and the state to invoke and develop a 
regressive national popular, as the government seeks to emphasize its monopoly 
on legitimate symbolic and actual violence.
Chapter 2, on tourism, examines the marketing of Colombia as a brand in the 
formal and informal economy, with a dual attention to sexuality and history. The 
sexual component argues that successive tourism policies have emphasized gender and nature via homologies between young women and the environment. 
This tendency is connected to child sex trafficking in Cartagena de Indias, the 
incipient violence underpinning the port’s gender and racial politics—and resistance to these formations. The historical component focuses on the recent controversy in Cartagena over a plaque erected to attract U.K. tourists that 
commemorated Britain’s blockade of the city during a struggle to control the 
Caribbean slave trade.
Chapter 3, on the media, is again double-sided. The first side investigates past 
and present violence against Colombian journalists, using interviews with victims to see how self-censorship arises from newsroom corruption and public 
threats and what can be done about it. The chapter’s second side draws on a content analysis of high-rating broadcast narconovelas and their narco aesthetic of 
light-skinned, blonde, surgically modified femininity, in a country where very 
few people either resemble that stereotype or can afford to develop it. This popularity derives from production practices within the media, historic tendencies 
toward machismo and Marianismo, domestic violence, and wider debates over 
gender and narcocultura.
Chapter  4, on the environment, looks at the nation’s crucial riparian thoroughfare, the Río Magdalena, and its systematic and accidental pollution 
through industrialization, warfare, and neglect. A content analysis centers on 
emotions expressed by Colombians in the words they use to describe the river, 
its meaning, and their feelings about the devastation it has undergone. The context is debates within science, activism, and government over the environment 
and the violence suffered by the Magdalena from development and conflict.
The book concludes with the notion that García Márquez’s oppositions are 
useful ways to understand the profound duality over violence in Colombian life 
that is both evident in, and sustained by, popular culture. At the same time, 
although binaries are good to think with, they are frequently logocentrically 
 EBSCOhost - printed on 4/26/2022 3:32 PM via UNIVERSIDAD DE LOS ANDES. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use
Introduction 43
interdependent, rather than truly opposed. One can see them more as paradoxes 
than contradictions.
The liberal/UN mantra of demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration as 
routes to post-conflict Colombian peace and prosperity derive from postwar 
western Europe and Japan—taking industrialized fascist countries and reestablishing them after monumental military defeat by state-socialist and state-capitalist 
ones. The model is barely credible when “reintegration” means returning to a 
corrupt, hugely unequal, and barely/badly governed nation. The focus on former combatants as problems is understandable, but it misses the reasons for 
their and others’ alienation, and the structural and organizational forces that 
either incubate or enact violence (Carranza-Franco 2019).
That said, many Colombians are dedicated to peaceful progress. In that spirit, 
I analyze the book’s themes in the context of theories and initiatives for building 
peace. For there are progressive elements in sports that draw on history and critique to problematize corporate nationalism. In tourism, social movements organize contra child sexual abuse, and there was opposition to the British plaque. 
Colombian journalists have shown a bravura, inventive response to occupational 
and physical intimidation, and critical responses problematize the racial and 
sexual politics of narcocultura. Social movements and environmental scientists 
seek to protect the environment from development.
The evidence of these diverse yet interconnected sites of the popular is that 
violence is never far from the surface; but nor are alternatives to it. The Persistence 
of Violence sheds light on the nation’s scarred bringing-into-being, the strange 
dialectic of a state that is either too present or too absent—able to coerce/unable 
to serve—and prevailing economic, racial, and sexual dogmas. It also addresses 
equally Colombian, pacific, social movements. They are just as persistent as the 
violence they oppose